



PROLOGUE


Drizzt ran his fingers over the intricate carvings of the panther statuette, its black onyx perfectly smooth and unmarred even in the ridged areas of the muscled neck. So much like Guenhwyvar, it looked a perfect representation. How could Drizzt bear to part with it now, fully convinced that he would never see the great panther again?
“Farewell, Guenhwyvar, ” the drow ranger whispered, his expression sorrowful, almost pitiful, as he stared at the figurine. “I cannot in good conscience take you with me on this journey, for I would fear your fate more than my own.” His sigh was one of sincere resignation. He and his friends had fought long and hard, and at great sacrifice, to get to this point of peace, yet Drizzt had come to know that it was a false victory. He wanted to deny it, to put Guenhwyvar back in his pouch and go blindly on, hoping for the best. Drizzt sighed away the momentary weakness and handed the figurine over to Regis, the halfling.
Regis stared up at Drizzt in disbelief for a long, silent while shocked by what the drow had told him and had demanded of him.
“Five weeks, ” Drizzt reminded him.
The halfling’s cherubic, boyish features crinkled. If Drizzt did not return in five weeks, Regis was to give Guenhwyvar to Catti-brie and tell both her and King Bruenor the truth of Drizzt’s departure. 
From the drow’s dark and somber tones, Regis understood that Drizzt did not expect to return.
On sudden inspiration, the halfling dropped the figurine to his bed and fumbled with a chain about his neck, its clasp caught in the long, curly locks of his brown hair. He finally got the thing undone and produced a pendant, dangling a large and magical ruby. 
Now Drizzt was shocked. He knew the value of Regis’s gemstone and the halfling’s craven love of the thing. To say that Regis was acting out of character would be an incredible understatement.
“I cannot, ” Drizzt argued, pushing the stone away. “I may not
return, and it would be lost. . .
“Take it!” Regis demanded sharply. “For all that you have done for me, for all of us, you surely deserve it. It’s one thing to leave Guenhwyvar behind it would be a tragedy indeed if the panther fell into the hands of your evil kin but this is merely a magical token, no living being, and it may aid you on your journey. Take it as you take your scimitars.” The halfling paused, his soft gaze locking with Drizzt’s violet orbs. “My friend.”
Regis snapped his fingers suddenly, stealing the quiet moment.
He rambled across the floor, his bare feet slapping on the cold stone and his nightshirt swishing about him. From a drawer he produced yet another item, a rather unremarkable mask.
“I recovered it, ” he said, not wanting to reveal the whole story of how he had acquired the familiar item. In truth, Regis had gone from Mithril Hall and found Artemis Entreri hanging helplessly
from a jutting stone far up the side of a ravine. Regis promptly had
looted the assassin, then cut the seam of Entreri’s cloak. The halfling had listened with some measure of satisfaction as the cloak, the only thing holding the battered, barely conscious man aloft, began to rip.
Drizzt eyed the magical mask for a long time. He had taken it from the lair of a banshee more than a year before. With it, its user could change his entire appearance, could hide his identity.
“This should help you get in and out, ” Regis said hopefully. Still Drizzt made no move.
“I want you to have it, ” Regis insisted, misunderstanding the drow’s hesitation and jerking it out toward Drizzt. Regis did not realize the significance the mask held for Drizzt Do’Urden. Drizzt
had once worn it to hide his identity, because a dark elf walking the surface world was at a great disadvantage. Drizzt had come to see the mask as a lie, however useful it might be, and he simply could
not bring him to do it again, whatever the potential gain.
Or could he? Drizzt wondered then if he could refuse the gift. If the mask could aid his cause, a cause that would likely affect those he was leaving behind then could he in good conscience refuse to wear it?
No, he decided at length, the mask was not that valuable to his cause. Three decades out of the city was a long time, and he was not so remarkable in appearance, not so notorious, certainly, that he would be recognized. He held out his upraised hand, denying the gift, and Regis, after one more unsuccessful try, shrugged his little
shoulders, and put the mask away.
Drizzt left without another word. Many hours remained before dawn, torches burned low in the upper levels of Mithril Hall, and few dwarves stirred. It seemed perfectly quiet, perfectly peaceful.
The dark elf’s slender fingers, lightly touching, making not a sound, traced the grain of a wooden door. He had no desire to disturb the person within, though he doubted that her sleep was very restful. 
Every night, Drizzt wanted to go to her and comfort her, and yet he had not, for he knew that his words would do little to soothe Catti-brie’s grief. Like so many other nights when he had stood by
this door, a watchful, helpless guardian, the ranger ended up padding down the stone corridor, filtering through the shadows of low dancing torches, his toe heel step making not a whisper of
sound.
With only a short pause at another door, the door of his dearest dwarven friend, Drizzt soon crossed out of the living areas. He came into the formal gathering places, where the king of Mithril Hall entertained visiting emissaries. 
A couple of dwarves, Dagna’s troops probably, were about in here, but they heard and saw nothing of the drow’s silent passing.
Drizzt paused again as he came to the entrance of the Hall of Dumathoin, wherein the dwarves of Clan Battlehammer kept their most precious items. He knew that he should continue, get out of the place before the clan began to stir, but he could not ignore the
emotions pulling at his heartstrings. He hadn’t come to this hallowed hall in the two weeks since his drow kin had been driven away, but he knew that he would never forgive himself if he didn’t
take at least one look.
The mighty warhammer, Aegis fang, rested on a pillar at the center of the adorned hall, the place of highest honor. It seemed fitting, for to Drizzt’s violet eyes, Aegis fang far outshone all the other
artifacts: the shining suits of mail, the great axes and helms of heroes
long dead, the anvil of a legendary smith. Drizzt smiled at the
notion that this warhammer hadn’t even been wielded by a dwarf. It had been the weapon of Wulfgar, Drizzt’s friend, who had willingly given his life so that the others of the tight band might survive.
Drizzt stared long and hard at the mighty weapon, at the gleaming mithril head, unscratched despite the many vicious battles the hammer had seen and showing the perfectly etched sigils of the
dwarven god Dumathoin. The drow’s gaze drifted down the item, settling on the dried blood on its dark adamantite handle. Bruenor, so stubborn, hadn’t allowed that blood to be cleaned away.
Memories of Wulfgar, of fighting beside the tall and strong, golden haired and golden skinned man flooded through the drow, weakening his knees and his resolve. In his mind, Drizzt looked again into Wulfgar’s clear eyes, the icy blue of the northern sky and always filled with an excited sparkle. Wulfgar had been just a boy, his spirit undaunted by the harsh realitics of a brutal world.
Just a boy, but one who had willingly sacrificed everything, a song on his lips, for those he called his friends.
“Farewell, ” Drizzt whispered, and he was gone, running this time, though no more loudly than he had walked before. In a few seconds, he crossed onto a balcony and down a flight of stairs, into a
widened high chamber. He crossed under the watchful eyes of Mithril Hall’s eight kings, their likenesses cut into the stone wall.
The last of the busts, that of King Bruenor Battlehammer, was the most striking. Bruenor ‘s visage was stern, a grim look intensified by a deep scar running from his forehead to his jawbone, and with his
right eye gone.
More than Bruenor’s eye had been wounded, Drizzt knew.
More than that dwarvish body, rock tough and resilient, had been scarred. Bruenor’s soul was the part most pained, slashed by the loss of a boy he had called his son. Was the dwarf as resilient in spirit as in body? 
Drizzt knew not the answer. At that moment, staring at Bruenor ‘s scarred face, Drizzt felt that he should stay, should
sit beside his friend and help heal the wounds.
It was a passing thought. What wounds might still come to the dwarf? Drizzt reminded himself. To the dwarf and to all his remaining friends?


Catti-brie tossed and squirmed, reliving that fateful moment, as she did every night, at least, every night that exhaustion allowed her to find sleep. She heard Wulfgar ‘s song to Tempus, his god of battle, saw the serene look in the mighty barbarian’s eye, the look that denied the obvious agony, the look that allowed him to chop up
at the loose stone ceiling, though blocks of heavy granite had begun to tumble all about him.
Catti-brie saw Wulfgar ‘s garish wounds, the white of bone, his skin ripped away from his ribs by the sharklike teeth of the yochlol, an evil, extradimensional beast, an ugly lump of waxy flesh that resembled a half melted candle.
The roar as the ceiling dropped over her love brought Catti-brie up in her bed, sitting in the darkness, her thick auburn hair matted to her face by cold sweat. She took a long moment to control her breathing, told herself repeatedly that it was a dream, a terrible memory, but ultimately, an event that had passed. The torchlight outlining her door comforted and calmed her.
She wore only a light slip, and her thrashing had knocked her blankets away. Goose bumps rose on her arms, and she shivered, cold and damp and miserable. She roughly retrieved the thickest of her covers and pulled them tightly to her neck, then lay flat on her back, staring up into the darkness.
Something was wrong. She sensed that something was out of place.
Rationally, the young woman told herself that she was imagining things, that her dreams had unnerved her. 
The world was not right for Catti-brie, far from right, but she told herself forcefully that she was in Mithril Hall, surrounded by an army of friends.
She told herself that she was imagining things.


Drizzt was a long way from Mithril Hall when the sun came up.
He didn’t sit and enjoy the dawn this day, as was his custom. He hardly looked at the rising sun, for it seemed to him now a false hope of things that could not be. When the initial glare had diminished, the drow looked out to the south and east, far across the mountains, and remembered. His hand went to his neck, to the hypnotic ruby pendant 
Regis had given him. He knew how much Regis relied on this gem, loved it, and considered again the halfling’s sacrifice, the sacrifice of a true friend. Drizzt had known true friendship; his life had been rich
since he had walked into a forlorn land called Icewind Dale and met Bruenor Battlehammer and his adopted daughter, Catti-brie. It pained Drizzt to think that he might never again see any of them.
The drow was glad to have the magical pendant, though, an item that might allow him to get answers and return to his friends, but he held more than a little guilt for his decision to tell Regis of his departure. 
That choice seemed a weakness to Drizzt, a need to rely on friends who, at this dark time, had little to give. 
He could rationalize it, though, as a necessary safeguard for the friends he would leave behind. He had instructed Regis to tell Bruenor the truth in five weeks, so that, in case Drizzt’s journey proved unsuccessful, Clan Battlehammer would at least have time to prepare for the darkness that might yet come.
It was a logical act, but Drizzt had to admit that he had told Regis because of his own need, because he had to tell someone. And what of the magical mask? he wondered. Had he been weak in refusing that, too? The powerful item might have aided Drizzt and, thus, aided his friends, but he had not the strength to wear it, to even touch it. Doubts floated all about the drow, hovered in the air before his eyes, mocking him. Drizzt sighed and rubbed the ruby between his slender black hands. For all his prowess with the blade, for all his dedication to principles, for all his ranger stoicism, Drizzt Do’Urden needed his friends. He glanced back toward Mithril Hall and wondered, for his own sake, if he had chosen rightly in undertaking this quest privately and secretly. More weakness, stubborn Drizzt decided. He let go of the ruby, mentally slapped away the lingering doubts, and slid his hand inside his forest green traveling cloak. From one of its pockets he produced a parchment, a map of the lands between the Spine of the World Mountains and the Great Desert of Anauroch. In the lower right hand corner Drizzt had marked a spot, the location of a cave from which he had once emerged, a cave that would take him home.

Part 1
DUTY BOUND

No race in all the Realms better understands the word vengeance than the drow. Vengeance is their dessert at their daily table, the sweetness they taste upon their smirking lips as though it was the ultimate delicious pleasure. And so hungering did the drow come for me. I cannot escape the anger and the guilt I feel for the loss of Wulfgar, for the pains the enemies of my dark past have brought to the friends I hold so dear. Whenever I look into Catti-brie’s fair face, I see a profound and everlasting sadness that should not be there, a burden that has no place in the sparkling eyes of a child.
Similarly wounded, I have no words to comfort her and doubt that there are any words that might bring solace. It is my course, then, that I must continue to protect my friends. I have come to realize that I must look beyond my own sense of loss for Wulfgar, beyond the immediate sadness that has taken hold of the dwarves of Mithril Hall and the hardy men of Settlestone. By Catti-brie’s account of that fateful fight, the creature Wulfgar battled was a yochlol, a handmaiden of Lloth. With that grim information, I must look beyond the immediate sorrow and consider that the sadness I fear is still to come. I do not understand all the chaotic games of the Spider Queen, I doubt that even the evil high priestesses know the foul creature’s true designs, but there lies in a yochlol’s presence a significance that even I,  the worst of the drow religious students, cannot miss. The handmaiden’s appearance revealed that the hunt was sanctified by the Spider Queen. And the fact that the yochlol intervened in the fighting does not bode well for the future of Mithril Hall.
It is all supposition, of course. I know not that my sister Vierna acted in concert with any of Menzoberranzan’s other dark powers, or that, with Vierna’s death, the death of my last relative, my link to the city of drow would ever again be explored. When I look into Catti-brie’s eyes, when I look upon Bruenor’s horrid scars, I’m reminded that hopeful supposition is a feeble and dangerous thing. My evil kin have taken one friend from me.
They will take no more.
I can find no answers in Mithril Hall, will never know for certain if the dark elves hunger still for vengeance, unless another force from Menzoberranzan comes to the surface to claim the bounty on my head. With this truth bending low my shoulders, how could I ever travel to Silverymoon, or to any other nearby town, resuming my normal life  style? How could I sleep in peace while holding within my heart the very real fear that the dark elves might soon return and once more imperil my friends? The apparent serenity of Mithril Hall, the brooding quiet, will show me nothing of the future designs of the drow. Yet, for the sake of my friends, I must know those dark intentions. I fear that there remains only one place for me to look.
Wulfgar gave his life so that his friends might live. In good conscience, could my own sacrifice be any less?

-Drizzt Do’Urden

Chapter 1
THE AMBITIOUS ONE


The mercenary leaned against the pillar anchoring the wide stairway of Triel Breche, on the northern side of the great cavern that housed Menzoberranzan, the city of drow. Jarlaxle removed his wide brimmed hat and ran a hand over the smooth skin of his bald head as he muttered a few curses under his breath.
Many lights were on in the city. Torches flickered in the high windows of houses carved from natural stalagmite formations. Lights in the drow city! Many of the elaborate structures had long been decorated by the soft glow of faerie fire, mostly purple and blue hues, but this was different.
Jarlaxle shifted to the side and winced as his weight came upon his recently wounded leg. Triel Baenre herself, the matron mistress of Arach Tinilith, among the highest ranking priestesses in the city,  had tended the wound, but Jarlaxle suspected that the wicked priestess had purposely left the job unfinished, had left a bit of the
pain to remind the mercenary of his failure in recapturing the renegade Drizzt Do’Urden.
“The glow wounds my eyes, ” came a sarcastic remark from behind. Jarlaxle turned to see Matron Baenre’s oldest daughter, that same Triel. She was shorter than most drow, nearly a foot shorter than Jarlaxle, but she carried herself with undeniable dignity and poise. Jarlaxle understood her powers (and her volatile temperament) better than most, and he certainly treated the diminutive female with the greatest caution. Staring, glaring, out over the city with squinting eyes, she moved beside him. “Curse the glow, ” she muttered. “It is by your matron’s command, ” Jarlaxle reminded her. His one good eye avoided her gaze; the other lay beneath a patch of shadow, which was tied behind his head. He replaced his great hat, pulling it low in front as he tried to hide his smirk at her resulting grimace.
Triel was not happy with her mother. Jarlaxle had known that since the moment Matron Baenre had begun to hint at her plans. Triel was possibly the most fanatic of the Spider Queen’s priestesses and would not go against Matron Baenre, the first matron mother of the city, not unless Lloth instructed her to. “Come along, ” the priestess growled. She turned and made her way across Tier Breche to the largest and most ornate of the drow Academy’s three buildings, a huge structure shaped to resemble a gigantic spider. Jarlaxle pointedly groaned as he moved, and lost ground with every limping step. His attempt to solicit a bit more healing magic was not successful, though, for Triel merely paused at the doorway to the great structure and waited for him with a patience that was more than a bit out of character, Jarlaxle knew, for Triel never waited for anything. As soon as he entered the temple, the mercenary was assaulted
by myriad aromas, everything from incense to the drying blood of the latest sacrifices, and chants rolled out of every side portal. Triel took note of none of it, she shrugged past the few disciples who bowed to her as they saw her walking the corridors. The single minded Baenre daughter moved into the higher levels, to the private quarters of the school’s mistresses, and walked down one small hallway, its floor alive with crawling spiders (including a few that stood as tall as Jarlaxle’s knee). Triel stopped between two equally decorated doors and motioned for Jarlaxle to enter the one on the right. The mercenary paused, did well to hide his confusion, but Triel was expecting it. She grabbed Jarlaxle by the shoulder and roughly spun him about. “You have been here before!” she accused. “Only upon my graduation from the school of fighters, ” Jarlaxle said, shrugging away from the female, “as are all of Melee  Magthere’s graduates.”
“You have been in the upper levels, ” Triel snarled, eyeing Jarlaxle squarely. The mercenary chuckled.
“You hesitated when I motioned for you to enter the chamber,  ”Triel went on, “because you know that the one to the left is my private room. That is where you expected to go.”
“I did not expect to be summoned here at all, ” Jarlaxle retorted,  trying to shift the subject. He was indeed a bit off guard that Triel had watched him so closely. Had he underestimated her trepidation at her mother’s latest plans?
Triel stared at him long and hard, her eyes unblinking and jaw firm.
“I have my sources, ” Jarlaxle admitted at length.
Another long moment passed, and still Triel did not blink. “You asked that I come, ” Jarlaxle reminded her.  
“I demanded, ” Triel corrected.
Jarlaxle swept into a low, exaggerated bow, snatching off his hat and brushing it out at arm’s length. The Baenre daughter’s eyes flashed with anger.
“Enough!” she shouted. 
“And enough of your games!” Jarlaxle spat back. “You asked that I come to the Academy, a place where I am not comfortable, and so I have come. You have questions, and I, perhaps, have answers.”
His qualification of that last sentence made Triel narrow her eyes. Jarlaxle was ever a cagey opponent, she knew as well as any one in the drow city. She had dealt with the cunning mercenary many times and still wasn’t quite sure if she had broken even against him or not. She turned and motioned for him to enter the left hand door instead, and, with another graceful bow, he did so,  stepping into a thickly carpeted and decorated room lit in a soft magical glow.
“Remove your boots, ” Triel instructed, and she slipped out of her own shoes before she stepped onto the plush rug.
Jarlaxle stood against the tapestry adorned wall just inside the door, looking doubtfully at his boots. Everyone who knew the mercenary knew that these were magical.
“Very well, ” Triel conceded, closing the door and sweeping past him to take a seat on a huge, overstuffed chair. A rolltop desk stood behind her, in front of one of many tapestries, this one depicting the sacrifice of a gigantic surface elf by a horde of dancing drow. Above the surface elf loomed the nearly translucent specter of a half drow, 
half spider creature, its face beautiful and serene. “You do not like your mother’s lights?” Jarlaxle asked. “You
keep your own room aglow.”
Triel bit her lower lip and narrowed her eyes once more. Most priestesses kept their private chambers dimly lit; that they might read their tomes. Heat sensing infravision was of little use in seeing the runes on a page. There were some inks that would hold distinctive heat for many years, but these were expensive and hard to come by, even for one as powerful as Triel. Jarlaxle stared back at the Baenre daughter’s grim expression. Triel was always mad about something, the mercenary mused. “The lights seem appropriate for what your mother has planned, ” he
went on.
“Indeed, ” Triel remarked, her tone biting. “And are you so arrogant as to believe that you understand my mother’s motives?”
“She will go back to Mithril Hall, ” Jarlaxle said openly, knowing that Triel had long ago drawn the same conclusion.
“Will she?” Triel asked coyly. The cryptic response set the mercenary back on his heels. Hetook a step toward a second, less cushiony chair in the room, and his heel clicked hard, even though he was walking across the incredibly thick and soft carpet. Triel smirked, not impressed by the magical boots. It was common knowledge that Jarlaxle could walk as quietly or as loudly as he desired on any type of surface. His abundant jewelry, bracelets
and trinkets seemed equally enchanted, for they would ring and tinkle or remain perfectly silent, as the mercenary desired.
“If you have left a hole in my carpet, I will fill it with your heart, ” Triel promised as Jarlaxle slumped back comfortably in the covered stone chair, smoothing a fold in the armrest so that the fabric showed a clear image of a black and yellow gee’antu spider, the Underdark’s version of the surface tarantula.
“Why do you suspect that your mother will not go?” Jarlaxle asked, pointedly ignoring the threat, though in knowing Triel Baenre, he honestly wondered how many other hearts were now entwined in the carpet’s fibers.
“Do I?” Triel asked. Jarlaxle let out a long sigh. He had suspected that this would be a moot meeting, a discussion where Triel tried to pry out what bits of information the mercenary already had attained, while offering little of her own. Still, when Triel had insisted that Jarlaxle come to her, instead of their usual arrangement, in which she went out from Tier Breche to meet the mercenary, Jarlaxle had hoped for something substantive. It was quickly becoming obvious to Jarlaxle that the only reason Triel wanted to meet in Arach Tinilith was that, in this secure place, even her mother’s prying ears would not hear.  And now, for all those painstaking arrangements, this all 
important meeting had become a useless bantering session. Triel seemed equally perturbed. She came forward in her chair suddenly, her expression fierce. “She desires a legacy!” the female
declared. Jarlaxle’s bracelets tinkled as he tapped his fingers together,  thinking that now they were finally getting somewhere. “The rulership of Menzoberranzan is no longer sufficient for the likes of Matron Baenre, ” Triel continued, more calmly, and she moved back in her seat. “She must expand her sphere.”
“I had thought your mother’s visions Lloth given, ” Jarlaxle remarked, and he was sincerely confused by Triel’s obvious disdain.
“Perhaps, ” Triel admitted. “The Spider Queen will welcome the conquest of Mithril Hall, particularly if it, in turn, leads to the capture of that renegade Do’Urden. But there are other considerations.”
“Blingdenstone?” Jarlaxle asked, referring to the city of the svirfnebli, the deep gnomes, traditional enemies of the drow.
“That is one, ” Triel replied. “Blingdenstone is not far off the path to the tunnels connecting Mithril Hall.”
“Your mother has mentioned that the svirfnebli might be dealt with properly on the return trip, ” Jarlaxle offered, figuring that he had to throw some tidbit out if he wanted Triel to continue so
openly with him. It seemed to the mercenary that Triel must be deeply upset to be permitting him such an honest view of her most private emotions and fears. Triel nodded, accepting the news stoically and without surprise.
“There are other considerations, ” she repeated. “The task Matron
Baenre is undertaking is enormous and will require allies along the way, perhaps even illithid allies.”
The Baenre daughter’s reasoning struck Jarlaxle as sound. Matron Baenre had long kept an illithid consort, an ugly and dangerous beast if Jarlaxle had ever seen one. He was never comfortable around the octopus headed humanoids. Jarlaxle survived by under standing and outguessing his enemies, but his skills were sorely lacking where illithids were concerned. The mind flayers, as members of the evil race were called, simply didn’t think the same way
as other races and acted in accord with principles and rules that no one other than an illithid seemed to know.
Still, the dark elves had often dealt successfully with the illithid community. Menzoberranzan housed twenty thousand skilled warriors, while the illithids in the region numbered barely a hundred. Triel’s fears seemed a bit overblown. Jarlaxle didn’t tell her that, though. Given her dark and volatile mood, the mercenary preferred to do more listening than speaking. Triel continued to shake her head, her expression typically sour. She leaped up from the chair, her black and purple, spider adorned robes swishing as she paced a tight circle.
“It will not be House Baenre alone, ” Jarlaxle reminded her, hoping to comfort Triel. “Many houses show lights in their windows.”
“Mother has done well in bringing the city together, ” Triel admitted, and the pace of her nervous stroll slowed.
“But still you fear, ” the mercenary reasoned. “And you need information so that you might be ready for any consequence.” Jarlaxle couldn’t help a small, ironic chuckle. He and Triel had been enemies for a long time, neither trusting the other, and with good reason! Now she needed him. She was a priestess in a secluded school, away from much of the city’s whispered rumors. Normally her prayers to the Spider Queen would have provided her all the information she needed, but now, if Lloth sanctioned Matron Baenre’s actions (and that fact seemed obvious), Triel would be left,  literally, in the dark. She needed a spy, and in Menzoberranzan, Jarlaxle and his spying network, Bregan D’aerthe, had no equal.
“We need each other, ” Triel pointedly replied, turning to eye the mercenary squarely. “Mother treads on dangerous ground, that much is obvious. If she falters, consider who will assume the seat of
the ruling house.”
True enough, Jarlaxle silently conceded. Triel, as the eldest daughter of the house, was indisputably next in line behind Matron Baenre and, as the matron mistress of Arach Tinilith, held the most powerful position in the city behind the matron mothers of the eight ruling houses. Triel already had established an impressive base of power. But in Menzoberranzan, where pretense of law was no more than a facade against an underlying chaos, power bases tended to shift as readily as lava pools.
“I will learn what I may, ” Jarlaxle answered, and he rose to leave. “And will tell you what I learn.”
Triel understood the half truth in the sly mercenary’s words,  but she had to accept his offer.
Jarlaxle was walking freely down the wide, curving avenues of Menzoberranzan a short while later, passing by the watchful eyes and readied weapons of house guards posted on nearly every stalagmite mound, and on the ringed balconies of many low hanging stalactites as well. The mercenary was not afraid, for his
wide brimmed hat identified him clearly to all in the city, and no house desired conflict with Bregan D’aerthe. It was the most secretive of bands, few in the city could even guess at the numbers in the group, and its bases were tucked away in the many nooks and crannies of the wide cavern. The company’s reputation was widespread, though, tolerated by the ruling houses, and most in the city would name Jarlaxle among the most powerful of Menzoberranzan’s males.
So comfortable was he that Jarlaxle hardly noticed the Lingering stares of the dangerous guards. His thoughts were inward, trying to decipher the subtle messages of his meeting with Triel. The assumed plan to conquer Mithril Hall seemed very promising. Jarlaxle had been to the dwarven stronghold, had witnessed its defenses. Although formidable, they seemed meager against the strength of a drow army. When Menzoberranzan conquered Mithril Hall, with Matron Baenre at the head of the force, Lloth would be supremely pleased, and House Baenre would know its pinnacle of glory. As Triel had put it, Matron Baenre would have her legacy. The pinnacle of power? The thought hung in Jarlaxle’s mind. He paused beside Narbondel, the great pillar time clock of Menzoberranzan, a smile widening across his ebon skinned face. 
“Pinnacle of power?” he whispered aloud.
Suddenly Jarlaxle understood Triel’s trepidation’s. She feared that her mother might overstep her bounds, might be gambling an already impressive empire for the sake of yet another acquisition. Even as he considered the notion, Jarlaxle understood a deeper significance to it all. Suppose that Matron Baenre was successful, that
Mithril Hall was conquered and Blingdenstone after that? He mused. What enemies would then be left to threaten the drow city,  to hold together the tentative hierarchy in Menzoberranzan?
For that matter, why had Blingdenstone, a place of enemies so near Menzoberranzan, been allowed to survive for all these centuries? Jarlaxle knew the answer. He knew that the gnomes unintentionally served as the glue that kept Menzoberranzan’s houses in line. With a common enemy so near, the drow’s constant infighting
had to be kept under control. But now Matron Baenre hinted at ungluing, expanding her empire to include not only Mithril Hall, but the troublesome gnomes as well. Triel did not fear that the drow would be beaten; neither did she fear any alliance with the small colony of illithids. She was afraid that her mother would succeed, would gain her
legacy. Matron Baenre was old, ancient even by drow standards,  and Triel was next in line for the house seat. At present, that would be a comfortable place indeed, but it would become far more tentative and dangerous if Mithril Hall and Blingdenstone were taken. The binding common enemy that kept the houses in line would be no more, and Triel would have to worry about a tie to the surface world a long way from Menzoberranzan, where reprisals by the allies of Mithril Hall would be inevitable. Jarlaxle understood what Matron Baenre wanted, but now he
wondered what Lloth, backing the withered female’s plans, had in mind. “Chaos, ” he decided. Menzoberranzan had been quiet for a long, long time. Some houses fought, that was inevitable. House Do’Urden and House DeVir, both ruling houses, had been obliterated, but the general structure of the city had remained solid and unthreatened.
“Ah, but you are delightful, ” Jarlaxle said, speaking his thoughts of Lloth aloud. He suddenly suspected that Lloth desired a new order, a refreshing housecleaning of a city grown boring. No wonder that Triel, in line to inherit her mother’s legacy, was not amused. The bald mercenary, himself a lover of intrigue and chaos, 
laughed heartily and looked to Narbondel. The clock’s heat was greatly diminished, showing it to be late in the Underdark night. Jarlaxle clicked his heels against the stone and set out for the Qu’ellarz’orl, the high plateau on Menzoberranzan’s eastern wall,  the region housing the city’s most powerful house. He didn’t want
to be late for his meeting with Matron Baenre, to whom he would report on in his “secret” meeting with her eldest daughter. Jarlaxle pondered how much he would tell the withered matron mother, and how he might twist his words to his best advantage.
How he loved the intrigue.


Chapter 2
FAREWELL RIDDLES


Bleary eyed after yet another long, restless night, Catti-brie 
pulled on a robe and crossed her small room, hoping to find comfort 
in the daylight. Her thick auburn hair had been flattened on one side 
of her head, forcing an angled cowlick on the other side, but she 
didn’t care. Busy rubbing the sleep from her eyes, she nearly stumbled 
over the threshold and paused there, struck suddenly by something she 
did not understand.
	She ran her fingers over the wood of the door and stood con 
fused, nearly overwhelmed by the same feeling she had felt the
night before, that something was out of place, that something was
wrong. She had intended to go straight to breakfast, but felt com 
pelled to get Drizzt instead.
	The young woman shuffled swiftly down the corridor to
Drizzt’s room and knocked on the door. After a few moments, she
called, “Drizzt?” When the drow didn’t answer, she gingerly turned
the handle and pushed the door open. Catti-brie noticed immedi 
ately that Drizzt’s scimitars and traveling cloak were gone, but
before she could begin to think about that, her eyes focused on the
bed. It was made, covers tucked neatly, though that was not unusual
for the dark elf.
	Catti-brie slipped over to the bed and inspected the folds. They
were neat, but not tight, and she understood that this bed had been
made a long while ago, that this bed had not been slept in the previ 
ous night.
	“What’s all this?” the young woman asked. She took a quick
look around the small room, then made her way back out into the
hall. Drizzt had gone out from Mithril Hall without warning before, 
and often he left at night. He usually journeyed to Silverymoon, the
fabulous city a week’s march to the east.
	Why, this time, did Catti-brie feel that something was amiss?
Why did this not so unusual scene strike Catti-brie as very out of
place? The young woman tried to shrug it away, to overrule her
heartfelt fears. She was just worried, she told herself. She had lost
Wulfgar and now felt overprotective of her other friends.
	Catti-brie walked as she thought it over, and soon paused at
another door. She tapped lightly, then, with no response forthcom 
ing (though she was certain that this one was not yet up and about), 
she banged harder. A groan came from within the room.
	Catti-brie pushed the door open and crossed the room, sliding
to kneel beside the tiny bed and roughly pulling the bedcovers
down from sleeping Regis, tickling his armpits as he began to
squirm.
	“Hey!” the plump halfling, recovered from his trials at the
hands of the assassin Artemis Entreri, cried out. He came awake
immediately and grabbed at the covers desperately.
	“Where’s Drizzt?” Catti-brie asked, tugging the covers away
more forcefully.
	“How would I know?” Regis protested. “I have not been out of
my room yet this morning!”
	“Get up.” Catti-brie was surprised by the sharpness of her own
voice, by the intensity of her command. The uncomfortable feelings
tugged at her again, more forcefully. She looked around the room, 
trying to discern what had triggered her sudden anxiety.
	She saw the panther figurine.
	Catti-brie’s unblinking stare locked on the object, Drizzt’s dear 
est possession. What was it doing in Regis’s room? she wondered.
Why had Drizzt left without it? Now the young woman’s logic
began to fall into agreement with her emotions. She skipped across
the bed, buried Regis in a jumble of covers (which he promptly
pulled tight around his shoulders), and retrieved the panther. She
then hopped back and tugged again at the stubborn halfling’s blan 
ket shell.
	“No!” Regis argued, yanking back. He dove facedown to his
mattress, pulling the ends of the pillow up around his dimpled face.
	Catti-brie grabbed him by the scruff of the neck, yanked him
from the bed, and dragged him across the room to seat him in one of
the two wooden chairs resting at opposite sides of a small table. Pil 
low still in hand, still tight against his face, Regis plopped his head
straight down on the table.
	Catti-brie took a firm and silent hold on the end of the pillow, 
quietly stood, then yanked it suddenly, tearing it from the surprised
halfling’s grasp so that his head knocked hard against the bare
wood.
	Groaning and grumbling, Regis sat straight in the chair and ran
stubby fingers through his fluffy and curly brown locks, their
bounce undiminished by a long night’s sleep.
	“What?” he demanded.
	Catti-brie slammed the panther figurine atop the table, leaving
it before the seated halfling. “Where is Drizzt?” she asked again, 
evenly.
	“Probably in the Undercity, ” Regis grumbled, running his
tongue all about his cottony feeling teeth. “Why don’t you go ask
Bruenor?”
	The mention of the dwarvish king set Catti-brie back on her
heels. Go ask Bruenor? she silently scoffed. Bruenor would hardly
speak to anyone, and was so immersed in despair that he probably
wouldn’t know it if his entire clan up and left in the middle of the
night!
	“So Drizzt left Guenhwyvar, ” Regis remarked, thinking to
downplay the whole thing. His words fell awkwardly on the per 
ceptive woman’s ears, though, and Catti-brie’s deep blue eyes nar 
rowed as she studied the halfling more closely.
	“What?” Regis asked innocently again, feeling the heat of that
unrelenting scrutiny.
	“Where is Drizzt?” Catti-brie asked, her tone dangerously calm.
“And why do ye have the cat?”
	Regis shook his head and wailed helplessly, dramatically drop 
ping his forehead again against the table.
	Catti-brie saw the act for what it was. She knew Regis too well
to be taken in by his wily charms. She grabbed a handful of curly
brown hair and tugged his head upright, then grabbed the front of
his nightshirt with her other hand. Her roughness startled the half 
ling; she could see that clearly by his expression, but she did not
relent. Regis flew from his seat. Catti-brie carried him three quick
steps, then slammed his back against the wall.
	Catti-brie’s scowling visage softened for just a moment, and her
free hand fumbled with the halfling’s nightshirt long enough that
she could determine that Regis was not wearing his magical ruby
pendant, an item she knew he never removed. Another curious, and
certainly out of place, fact that assailed her sensibilities, fed her
growing belief that something indeed was terribly wrong.
	“Suren there’s something going on here that’s not what it’s sup 
posed to be, ” Catti-brie said, her scowl returning tenfold.
	“Catti-brie!” Regis replied, looking down to his furry topped
feet, dangling twenty inches from the floor.
	“And ye know something about it, ” Catti-brie went on.
	“Catti-brie!” Regis wailed again, trying to bring the fiery young
woman to her senses.
	Catti-brie took up the halfling’s nightshirt in both her hands, 
pulled him away from the wall, and slammed him back again, hard.
“I’ve lost Wulfgar, ” she said grimly, pointedly reminding Regis that
he might not be dealing with someone rational.
	Regis didn’t know what to think. Bruenor Battlehammer’s
daughter had always been the levelheaded one of the troupe, the
calm influence that kept the others in line. Even cool Drizzt had
often used Catti-brie as a guidepost to his conscience. But now...
	Regis saw the promise of pain set within the depths of Catti 
brie’s deep blue, angry eyes.
	She pulled him from the wall once more and slammed him
back. “Ye’re going to tell me what ye know, ” she said evenly.
	The back of Regis’s head throbbed from the banging. He was
scared, very scared, as much for Catti-brie as for himself. Had her
grief brought her to this point of desperation? And why was he sud 
denly caught in the middle of all this? All that Regis wanfed out of
life was a warm bed and a warmer meal.
	“We should go and sit down with Brue, ” he began, but he was
summarily interrupted as Catti-brie slapped him across the face.
	He brought his hand up to the stinging cheek, felt the angry
welt rising there. He never blinked, eyeing the young woman with
disbelief.
	Catti-brie’s violent reaction had apparently surprised her as
much as Regis. The halfling saw tears welling in her gentle eyes. She
trembled, and Regis honestly didn’t know what she might do.
	The halfling considered his situation for a long moment, coming
to wonder what difference a few days or weeks could make. “Drizzt
went home, ” the halfling said softly, always willing to do as the situ 
ation demanded. Worrying about consequences could come later.
	Catti-brie relaxed somewhat. “This is his home, ” she reasoned.
“Suren ye don’t mean Icewind Dale.”
	“Menzoberranzan, ” Regis corrected.
	If Catti-brie had taken a crossbow quarrel in her back, it would
not have hit her harder than that single word. She let Regis down to
the floor and tumbled backward, falling into a sitting position on
the edge of the halfling’s bed.
	“He really left Guenhwyvar for you, ” Regis explained. “He
cares for both you and the cat so very much.”
	His soothing words did not shake the horrified expression from
Catti-brie’s face. Regis wished he had his ruby pendant, so that he
might use its undeniable charms to calm the young woman.
	“You can’t tell Bruenor, ” Regis added. “Besides, Drizzt might
not even go that far.” The halfling thought an embellishment of the
truth might go a long way. “He said he was off to see Alustriel, to
try to decide where his course should lead.” It wasn’t exactly true, 
Drizzt had only mentioned that he might stop by Silverymoon to
see if he might confirm his fears, but Regis decided that Catti-brie
needed to be given some hope.
	“You can’t tell Bruenor, ” the halfling said again, more forcefully.
Catti-brie looked up at him; her expression was truly one of the
most pitiful sights Regis had ever seen.
	“He’ll be back, ” Regis said to her, rushing over to sit beside her.
“You know Drizzt. He’ll be back.”
	It was too much for Catti-brie to digest. She gently pulled
Regis’s hand off her arm and rose. She looked to the panther fig 
urine once more, sitting upon the small table, but she had not the
strength to retrieve it.
	Catti-brie padded silently out of the room, back to her own
chambers, where she fell listlessly upon her bed.



	Drizzt spent midday sleeping in the cool shadows of a cave, 
many miles from Mithril Hall’s eastern door. The early summer air
was warm, the breeze off the cold glaciers of the mountains carrying
little weight against the powerful rays of the sun in a cloudless sum 
mer sky.
	The drow did not sleep long or well. His rest was filled with
thoughts of Wulfgar, of all his friends, and of distant images, memo 
ries of that awful place, Menzoberranzan.
	Awful and beautiful, like the dark elves who had sculpted it.
	Drizzt moved to his shallow cave’s entrance to take his meal. He
basked in the warmth of the bright afternoon, in the sounds of the
many animals. How different was this from his Underdark home!
How wonderful!
	Drizzt threw his dried biscuit into the dirt and punched the
floor beside him.
	How wonderful indeed was this false hope that had been dan 
gled before his desperate eyes. All that he had wanted in life was to
escape the ways of his kin, to live in peace. Then he had come to the
surface, and soon after, had decided that this place, this place of
buzzing bees and chirping birds, of warm sunlight and alluring
moonlight, should be his home, not the eternal darkness of those
tunnels far below.
	Drizzt Do’Urden had chosen the surface, but what did that
choice mean? It meant that he would come to know new, dear
friends, and by his mere presence, trap them into his dark legacy. It
meant that Wulfgar would die by the summons of Drizzt’s own sis 
ter, and that all of Mithril Hall might soon be in peril.
	It meant that his choice was a false one, that he could not stay.
	The disciplined drow calmed quickly and took out some more
food, forcing it past the angry lump in his throat. He considered his
course as he ate. The road before him would lead out of the moun 
tains and past a village called Pengallen. Drizzt had been there
recently, and he did not wish to return.
	He would not follow the road at all, he decided at length. What
purpose would going to Silverymoon serve? Drizzt doubted that
Lady Alustriel would be there, with the trading season open in full.
Even if she was, what could she tell him that he did not already
know?
	No, Drizzt had already determined his ultimate course and he
did not need Alustriel to confirm it. He gathered his belongings and
sighed as he considered again how empty the road seemed without
his dear panther companion. He walked out into the bright day, 
straight toward the east, off the southeastern road.



	Her stomach did not complain that breakfast, and lunch, had
passed and still she lay motionless on her bed, caught in a web of
despair. She had lost Wulfgar, barely days before their planned wed 
ding, and now Drizzt, whom she loved as much as she had the bar 
barian, was gone as well. It seemed as though her entire world had
crumbled around her. A foundation that had been built of stone
shifted like sand on the blowing wind.
	Catti-brie had been a fighter all of her young life. She didn’t
remember her mother, and barely recalled her father, who had been
killed in a goblin raid in Ten Towns when she was very young.
Bruenor Battlehammer had taken her in and raised her as his own
daughter, and Catti-brie had found a fine life among the dwarves of
Bruenor’s clan. Except for Bruenor, though, the dwarves had been
friends, not family. Catti-brie had forged a new family one at a
time, first Bruenor, then Drizzt, then Regis, and, finally, Wulfgar.
	Now Wulfgar was dead and Drizzt gone, back to his wicked
homeland with, by Catti-brie’s estimation, little chance of returning.
	Catti-brie felt so very helpless about it all! She had watched
Wulfgar die, watched him chop a ceiling down onto his own head
so that she might escape the clutches of the monstrous yochlol. She
had tried to help, but had failed and, in the end, all that remained
was a pile of rubble and Aegis fang.
	In the weeks since, Catti-brie had teetered on the edge of con 
trol, trying futilely to deny the paralyzing grief. She had cried often, 
but always had managed to check it after the first few sobs with a
deep breath and sheer willpower. The only one she could talk to had
been Drizzt.
	Now Drizzt was gone, and now, too, Catti-brie did cry, a flood
of tears, sobs wracking her deceptively delicate frame. She wanted
Wulfgar back! She protested to whatever gods might be listening
that he was too young to be taken from her, with too many great
deeds ahead of him.
	Her sobs became intense growls, fierce denial. Pillows flew
across the room, and Catti-brie grabbed the blankets into a pile and
heaved them as well. Then she overturned her bed just for the plea 
sure of hearing its wooden frame crack against the hard floor.
	“No!” The word came from deep inside, from the young
fighter’s belly. The loss of Wulfgar wasn’t fair, but there was nothing
Catti-brie could do about that.
	Drizzt’s leaving wasn’t fair, not in Catti-brie’s wounded mind, 
but there was nothing...
	The thought hung in Catti-brie’s mind. Still trembling, but now
under control, she stood beside the overturned bed. She understood
why the drow had left secretly, why Drizzt had, as was typical, 
taken the whole burden on himself.
	“No, ” the young woman said again. She stripped off her night 
clothes, grabbed a blanket to towel the sweat from her, then donned
breeches and chemise. Catti-brie did not hesitate to consider her
actions, fearful that if she thought about things rationally, she might
change her mind. She quickly slipped on a chain link coat of supple
and thin mithril armor, so finely crafted by the dwarves that it was
barely detectable after she had donned her sleeveless tunic.
	Still moving frantically, Catti-brie pulled on her boots, grabbed
her cloak and leather gloves, and rushed across the room to her
closet. There she found her sword belt, quiver, and Taulmaril the
Heartseeker, her enchanted bow. She ran, didn’t walk, from her
room to the halfling’s and banged on the door only once before
bursting in.
	Regis was in bed again, big surprise, his belly full from a
breakfast that had continued uninterrupted right into lunch. He was
awake, though, and none too happy to see Catti-brie charging at
him once more.
	She pulled him up to a sitting position, and he regarded her
curiously. Lines from tears streaked her cheeks, and her splendid
blue eyes were edged by angry red veins. Regis had lived most of
his life as a thief, had survived by understanding people, and it
wasn’t hard for him to figure out the reasons behind the young
woman’s sudden fire.
	“Where did ye put the panther?” Catti-brie demanded.
	Regis stared at her for a long moment. Catti-brie gave him a
rough shake.
	“Tell me quick, ” she demanded. “I’ve lost too much time
already." 
	“For what?” Regis asked, though he knew the answer.
	“Just give me the cat, ” Catti-brie said. Regis unconsciously
glanced toward his bureau, and Catti-brie rushed to it, then tore it
open and laid waste to the drawers, one by one.
	“Drizzt won’t like this, ” Regis said calmly.
	“To the Nine Hells with him, then!” Catti-brie shot back. She
found the figurine and held it before her eyes, marveling at its beau 
tiful form.
	“You think Guenhwyvar will lead you to him, ” Regis stated
more than asked.
	Catti-brie dropped the figurine into a belt pouch and did not
bother to reply.
	“Suppose you do catch up with him, ” Regis went on as the
young woman headed for the door. “How much will you aid Drizzt
in a city of drow? A human woman might stand out a bit down
there, don’t you think?”
	The halfling’s sarcasm stopped Catti-brie, made her consider for
the first time what she meant to do. How true was Regis’s reason 
ing! How could she get into Menzoberranzan? And even if she did, 
how could she even see the floor ahead of her?
	“No!” Catti-brie shouted at length, her logic blown away by that
welling, helpless feeling. “I’m going to him anyway. I’ll not stand by
and wait to learn that another of me friends has been killed!”
	“Trust him, ” Regis pleaded, and, for the first time, the halfling
began to think that maybe he would not be able to stop the impetu 
ous Catti-brie.
	Catti-brie shook her head and started for the door again.
	“Wait!” Regis called, begged, and the young woman pivoted
about to regard him. Regis hung in a precarious position. It seemed
to him that he should run out shouting for Bruenor, or for General
Dagna, or for any of the dwarves, enlisting allies to hold back Catti 
brie, physically if need be. She was crazy; her decision to run off
after Drizzt made no sense at all.
	But Regis understood her desire, and he sympathized with her
with all his heart.
	“If it was meself who left, ” Catti-brie began, “and Drizzt who
wanted to follow...
	Regis nodded in agreement. If Catti-brie, or any of them, had
gone into apparent peril, Drizzt Do’Urden would have taken up the
chase, and taken up the fight, no matter the odds. Drizzt, Wulfgar, 
Catti-brie, and Bruenor had gone more than halfway across the con 
tinent in search of Regis when Entreri had abducted him. Regis had
known Catti-brie since she was just a child, and had always held her
in the highest regard, but never had he been more proud of her than
at this very moment.
	“A human will be a detriment to Drizzt in Menzoberranzan, ” he
said again.
	“I care not, ” Catti-brie said under her breath. She did not under 
stand where Regis’s words were leading.
	Regis hopped off his bed and rushed across the room. Catti-brie
braced, thinking he meant to tackle her, but he ran past, to his desk, 
and pulled open one of its lower drawers. “So don’t be a human, ”
the halfling proclaimed, and he tossed the magical mask to Catti 
brie.
	Catti-brie caught it and stood staring at it in surprise as Regis
ran back past her, to his bed.
	Entreri had used the mask to get into Mithril Hall, had, through
its magic, so perfectly disguised himself as Regis that the halfling’s
friends, even Drizzt, had been taken in.
	“Drizzt really is making for Silverymoon, ” Regis told her.
	Catti-brie was surprised, thinking that the drow would have
simply gone into the Underdark through the lower chambers of
Mithril Hall. When she thought about it, though, she realized that
Bruenor had placed many guards at those chambers, with orders to
keep the doors closed and locked.
	“One more thing, ” Regis said. Catti-brie looped the mask on her
belt and turned to the bed, to see Regis standing on the shifted mat 
tress, holding a brilliantly jeweled dagger in his hands.
	“I won’t need this, ” Regis explained, “not here, with Bruenor
and his thousands beside me.” He held the weapon out, but Catti 
brie did not immediately take it.
	She had seen that dagger, Artemis Entreri’s dagger, before. The
assassin had once pressed it against her neck, stealing her courage, 
making her feel more helpless, more a little girl, than at any other
time in her life. Catti-brie wasn’t sure that she could take it from
Regis, wasn’t sure that she could bear to carry the thing with her.
	“Entreri is dead, ” Regis assured her, not quite understanding
her hesitation.
	Catti-brie nodded absently, though her thoughts remained filled
with memories of being Entreri’s captive. She remembered the
man’s earthy smell and equated that smell now with the aroma of
pure evil. She had been so powerless.. . like the moment when the
ceiling fell in on Wulfgar. Powerless now, she wondered, when
Drizzt might need her?
	Catti-brie firmed her jaw and took the dagger. She clutched it
tightly, then slid it into her belt.
	“Ye mustn’t tell Bruenor, ” she said.
	“He’ll know, ” Regis argued. “I might have been able to turn
aside his curiosity about Drizzt’s departure, Drizzt is always leav 
ing, but Bruenor will soon realize that you are gone.”
	Catti-brie had no argument for that, but, again, she didn’t care.
She had to get to Drizzt. This was her quest, her way of taking back
control of a life that had quickly been turned upside down.
	She rushed to the bed, wrapped Regis in a big hug, and kissed
him hard on the cheek. “Farewell, me friend!” she cried, dropping
him to the mattress. “Farewell!”
	Then she was gone, and Regis sat there, his chin in his plump
hands. So many things had changed in the last day. First Drizzt, and
now Catti-brie. With Wulfgar gone, that left only Regis and Bruenor
of the five friends remaining in Mithril Hall.
	Bruenor! Regis rolled to his side and groaned. He buried his
face in his hands at the thought of the mighty dwarf. If Bruenor ever
learned that Regis had aided Catti-brie on her dangerous way, he
would rip the halfling apart.
	Regis couldn’t begin to think of how he might tell the dwarven
king. Suddenly he regretted his decision, felt stupid for letting his
emotions, his sympathies, get in the way of good judgment. He
understood Catti-brie’s need and felt that it was right for her to go
after Drizzt, if that was what she truly desired to do, she was a
grown woman, after all, and a fine warrior, but Bruenor wouldn’t
understand.
	Neither would Drizzt, the halfling realized, and he groaned again.
He had broken his word to the drow, had told the secret on the very
first day! And his mistake had sent Catti-brie running into danger.
	“Drizzt will kill me!” he wailed.
	Catti-brie’s head came back around the doorjamb, her smile
wider, more full of life, than Regis had seen it in a long, long time.
Suddenly she seemed the spirited lass that he and the others had
come to love, the spirited young woman who had been lost to the
world when the ceiling had fallen on Wulfgar. Even the redness had
flown from her eyes, replaced by a joyful inner sparkle. “Just ye
hope that Drizzt comes back to kill ye!” Catti-brie chirped, and she
blew the halfling a kiss and rushed away.
	“Wait!” Regis called halfheartedly. Regis was just as glad that
Catti-brie didn’t stop. He still thought himself irrational, even stu 
pid, and still knew that he would have to answer to both Bruenor
and Drizzt for his actions, but that last smile of Catti-brie’s, her
spark of life so obviously returned, had settled the argument.

Chapter 3
BAENRE’S BLUFF


	The mercenary silently approached the western end of
the Baenre compound, creeping from shadow to shadow
to get near the silvery spiderweb fence that surrounded
the place. Like any who came near House Baenre, which
encompassed twenty huge and hollowed stalagmites and thirty
adorned stalactites, Jarlaxle found himself impressed once more. By
Underdark standards, where space was at a premium, the place was
huge, nearly half a mile long and half that wide.
	Everything about the structures of House Baenre was mar 
velous. Not a detail had been overlooked in the craftsmanship;
slaves worked continually to carve new designs into those few areas
that had not yet been detailed. The magical tQuches, supplied
mostly by Gromph, Matron Baenre’s elderboy and the archmage of
Menzoberranzan, were no less spectacular, right down to the pre 
dominant purple and blue faerie fire hues highlighting just the right
areas of the mounds for the most awe inspiring effect.
	The compound’s twenty foot high fence, which seemed so tiny
anchoring the gigantic stalagmite mounds, was among the most
wonderful creations in all of Menzoberranzan. Some said that it was
a gift from Lloth, though none in the city, except perhaps ancient
Matron Baenre, had been around long enough to witness its con 
struction. The barrier was formed of iron strong strands, thick as a
drow’s arm and enchanted to grasp and stubbornly cling stronger
than any spider’s web. Even the sharpest of drow weapons, 
arguably the finest edged weapons in all of Toril, could not nick the
strands of Baenre’s fence, and, once caught, no monster of any
strength, not a giant or even a dragon, could hope to break free.
	Normally, visitors to House Baenre would have sought one of
the symmetrical gates spaced about the compound. There a watch 
man could have spoken the day’s command and the strands of the
fence would have spiraled outward, opening a hole.
	Jarlaxle was no normal visitor, though, and Matron Baenre had
instructed him to keep his comings and goings private. He waited in
the shadows, perfectly hidden as several foot soldiers ambled by on
their patrol. They were not overly alert, Jarlaxle noted, and why
should they be, with the forces of Baenre behind them? House
Baenre held at least twenty five hundred capable and fabulously
armed soldiers and boasted sixteen high priestesses. No other house
in the city, no five houses combined, could muster such a force.
	The mercenary glanced over to the pillar of Narbondel to dis 
cern how much longer he had to wait. He had barely turned back to
the Baenre compound when a horn blew, clear and strong, and then
another.
	A chant, a low singing, arose from inside the compound. Foot
soldiers rushed to their posts and came to rigid attention, their
weapons presented ceremoniously before them. This was the spec 
tacle that showed the honor of Menzoberranzan, the disciplined, 
precision drilling that mocked any potential enemy’s claims that
dark elves were too chaotic to come together in common cause or
common defense. Non drow mercenaries, particularly the gray
dwarves, often paid handsome sums of gold and gems simply to
view the spectacle of the changing of the Baenre house guard.
	Streaks of orange, red, green, blue, and purple light rushed up
the stalagmite mounds, to meet similar streaks coming down from
above, from the jagged teeth of the Baenre compound’s stalactites.
Enchanted house emblems, worn by the Baenre guards, created this
effect as male dark elves rode subterranean lizards that could walk
equally well on floors, walls, or ceilings.
	The music continued. The glowing streaks formed inyriad
designs in brilliant formations up and down the compound, many
of them taking on the image of an arachnid. This event occurred
twice a day, every day, and any drow within watching distance
paused and took note each and every time. The changing of the
Baenre house guard was a symbol in Menzoberranzan of both
House Baenre’s incredible power, and the city’s undying fealty to
Lloth, the Spider Queen.
	Jarlaxle, as he had been instructed by Matron Baenre, used the
spectacle as a distraction. He crept up to the fence, dropped his
wide brimmed hat to hang at his back, and slipped a mask of black
velvet cloth, with eight joint wired legs protruding from its sides, 
over his head. With a quick glance, the mercenary started up, hand
over hand, climbing the thick strands as though they were ordinary
iron. No magical spells could have duplicated this effect; no spells
of levitation and teleportation, or any other kind of magical travel, 
could have brought someone beyond the barrier. Only the rare and
treasured spider mask, loaned to Jarlaxle by Gromph Baenre, could
get someone so easily into the well guarded compound.
	Jarlaxle swung a leg over the top of the fence and slipped down
the other side. He froze in place at the sight of an orange flash to his
left. Curse his luck if he had been caught. The guard would likely
pose no danger, all in the Baenre compound knew the mercenary
well, but if Matron Baenre learned that he had been discovered, 
she would likely flail the skin from his bones.
	The flaring light died away almost immediately, and as Jar 
laxle’s eyes adjusted to the changing hues, he saw a handsome
young drow with neatly cropped hair sitting astride a large lizard, 
perpendicular to the floor and holding a ten foot long mottled
lance. A death lance, Jarlaxle knew. It was coldly enchanted, its hun 
gry and razor edged tip revealing its deadly chill to the mercenary’s
heat sensing eyes.
	Well met, Berg’inyon Baenre, the mercenary flashed in the intri 
cate and silent hand code of the drow. Berg’inyon was Matron
Baenre’s youngest son, the leader of the Baenre lizard riders, and no
enemy of, or stranger to, the mercenary leader.
	And you, Jarlaxle, Berg’inyon flashed back. Prompt, as always.
	As your mother demands, Jarlaxle signaled back. Berg’inyon
flashed a smile and motioned for the mercenary to be on his way, 
then kicked his mount and scampered up the side of the stalagmite
to his ceiling patrol.
	Jarlaxle liked the youngest Baenre male. He had spent many
days with Berg’inyon lately, learning from the young fighter, for
Berg’inyon had once been a classmate of Drizzt Do’Urden’s at
Melee Magthere and had often sparred against the scimitar wield 
ing drow. Berg’inyon’s battle moves were fluid and near perfect, 
and knowledge of how Drizzt had defeated the young Baenre
heightened Jarlaxle’s respect for the renegade.
	Jarlaxle almost mourned that Drizzt Do’Urden would soon be
no more.
	Once past the fence, the mercenary replaced the spider mask in
a pouch and walked nonchalantly through the Baenre compound, 
keeping his telltale hat low on his back and his cloak tight about his
shoulder, hiding the fact that he wore a sleeveless tunic. He couldn’t
hide his bald head, though, an unusual trait, and he knew that more
than one of the Baenre guards recognized him as he made his way
casually to the house’s great mound, the huge and ornate stalagmite
wherein resided the Baenre nobles.
	Those guards didn’t notice, though, or pretended not to, as they
had likely been instructed. Jarlaxle nearly laughed aloud; so many
troubles could have been avoided just by his going through a more
conspicuous gate to the compound. Everyone, Triel included, knew
full well that he would be there. It was all a game of pretense and
intrigue, with Matron Baenre as the controlling player.
	“Z’ress!” the mercenary cried, the drow word for strength and
the password for this mound, and he pushed on the stone door, 
which retracted immediately into the top of its jamb.
	Jarlaxle tipped his hat to the unseen guards (probably huge
minotaur slaves, Matron Baenre’s favorites) as he passed along the
narrow entry corridor, between several slits, no doubt lined with
readied death lances.
	The inside of the mound was lighted, forcing Jarlaxle to pause
and allow his eyes to shift back to the visible light spectrum. Dozens
of female dark elves moved about, their silver and black Baenre
uniforms tightly fitting their firm and alluring bodies. All eyes
turned toward the newcomer, the leader of Bregan D’aerthe was
considered a fine catch in Menzoberranzan, and the lewd way the
females scrutinized him, hardly looking at his face at all, made Jar 
laxle bite back a laugh. Some male dark elves resented such leers, 
but to Jarlaxle’s thinking, these females’ obvious hunger afforded
him even more power.
	The mercenary moved to the large black pillar in the heart of the
central circular chamber. He felt along the smooth marble and
located the pressure plate that opened a section of the curving wall.
	Jarlaxle found Dantrag Baenre, the house weapon master, lean 
ing casually against the wall inside. Jarlaxle quickly discerned that
the fighter had been waiting for him. Like his younger brother, 
Dantrag was handsome, tall (closer to six feet than to five), and lean, 
his muscles finely tuned. His eyes were unusually amber, though
they shifted toward red when he grew excited. He wore his white
hair pulled back tightly into a ponytail.
	As weapon master of House Baenre, Dantrag was better outfit 
ted for battle than any other drow in the city. Dantrag’s shimmering
black coat of mesh mail glistened as he turned, conforming to the
angles of his body so perfectly that it seemed a second skin. He
wore two swords on his jeweled belt. Curiously, only one of these
was of drow make, as fine a sword as Jarlaxle had ever seen. The
other, reportedly taken from a surface dweller, was said to possess a
hunger of its own and could shave the edges off hard stone without
dulling in the least.
	The cocky fighter lifted one arm to salute the mercenary. As he
did so, he prominently displayed one of his magical bracers, tight
straps of black material lined with gleaming mithril rings. Dantrag
had never told what purpose those bracers served. Some thought
that they offered magical protection. Jarlaxle had seen Dantrag in
battle and didn’t disagree, for such defensive bracers were not
uncommon. What amazed the mercenary even more was the fact
that, in combat, Dantrag struck at his opponent first more often than
not.
	Jarlaxle couldn’t be sure of his suspicions, for even without the
bracers and any other magic, Dantrag Baenre was one of the finest
fighters in Menzoberranzan. His principal rival had been Zak’nafein
Do’Urden, father and mentor of Drizzt, but Zak’nafein was dead
now, sacrificed for blasphemous acts against the Spider Queen. That
left only Uthegental, the huge and strong weapon master of House
Barrison Del’Armgo, the city’s second house, as a suitable rival for
dangerous Dantrag. Knowing both fighters’ pride, Jarlaxle sus 
pected that one day the two would secretly meet in a battle to the
death, just to see who was the better.
	The thought of such a spectacle intrigued Jarlaxle, though he
never understood such destructive pride. Many who had seen the
mercenary leader in battle would argue that he was a match for
either of the two, but Jarlaxle would never play into  such intrigue.
To Jarlaxle it seemed that pride was a silly thing to fight for, espe 
cially when such fine weapons and skill could be used to bring more
substantive treasures. Like those bracers, perhaps? Jarlaxle mused.
Or would those fabulous bracers aid Dantrag in looting Uthegen 
tal’s corpse?
	With magic, anything was possible. Jarlaxle smiled as he contin 
ued to study Dantrag; the mercenary loved exotic magic, and
nowhere in all the Underdark was there a finer collection of magical
items than in House Baenre.
	Like this cylinder he had entered. It seemed unremarkable, a
plain circular chamber with a hole in the ceiling to Jarlaxle’s left and
a hole in the floor to his right.
	He nodded to Dantrag, who waved his hand out to the left, and
Jarlaxle walked under the hole. A tingling magic grabbed him and
gradually lifted him into the air, levitating him to the great mound’s
second level. Inside the cylinder, this area appeared identical to the
first, and Jarlaxle moved directly across the way, to the ceiling hole
that would lead him to the third level.
	Dantrag was up into the second level as Jarlaxle silently floated
up to the third, and the weapon master came up quickly, catching
Jarlaxle’s arm as he reached for the opening mechanism to this
level’s door. Dantrag nodded to the next ceiling hole, which led to
the fourth level and Matron Baenre’s private throne room.
	The fourth level? Jarlaxle pondered as he followed Dantrag into
place and slowly began to levitate once more. Matron Baenre’s pri 
vate throne room? Normally, the first matron mother held audience
in the mound’s third level.
	Matron Baenre already has a guest, Dantrag explained in the hand
code as Jarlaxle’s head came above the floor.
	Jarlaxle nodded and stepped away from the hole, allowing
Dantrag to lead the way. Dantrag did not reach for the door, how 
ever, but rather reached into a pouch and produced some silvery 
glowing dust. With a wink to the mercenary, he flung the dust
against the back wall. It sparkled and moved of its own accord, 
formed a silvery spider’s web, which then spiraled outward, much
like the Baenre gates, leaving a clear opening.
	After you, Dantrag’s hands politely suggested.
	Jarlaxle studied the devious fighter, trying to discern if treach 
ery was afoot. Might he climb through the obvious extradimen 
sional gate only to find himself stranded on some hellish plane of
existence?
	Dantrag was a cool opponent, his beautiful, chiseled features, 
cheekbones set high and resolute, revealing nothing to Jarlaxle’s
usually effective, probing gaze. Jarlaxle did go through the opening, 
though, finally deciding that Dantrag was too proud to trick him
into oblivion. If Dantrag had wanted Jarlaxle out of the way, he
would have used weapons, not wizard’s mischief.
	The Baenre son stepped right behind Jarlaxle, into a small, 
extradimensional pocket sharing space with Matron Baenre’s throne
room. Dantrag led Jarlaxle along a thin silver thread to the far side
of the small chamber, to an opening that looked out into the room.
	There, on a large sapphire throne, sat the withered Matron
Baenre, her face crisscrossed by thousands of spidery lines. Jarlaxle
spent a long moment eyeing the Throne before considering the
matron mother, and he unconsciously licked his thin lips. Dantrag
chuckled at his side, for the wary Baenre could understand the mer 
cenary’s desire. At the end of each of the throne’s arms was set a
huge diamond of no fewer than thirty carats.
	The throne itself was carved of the purest black sapphire, a shin 
ing well that offered an invitation into its depths. Writhing forms
moved about inside that pool of blackness; rumor said that the tor 
mented souls of all those who had been unfaithful to Lloth, and had, 
in turn, been transformed into hideous driders, resided in an inky
black dimension within the confines of Matron Baenre’s fabulous
throne.
	That sobering thought brought the mercenary from his casing;
he might consider the act, but he would never be so foolish as to try
to take one of those diamonds! He looked to Matron Baenre then~, 
her two unremarkable scribes huddled behind her, busily taking
notes. The first matron mother was flanked on her left by Bladen’
Kerst, the oldest daughter in the house proper, the third oldest of the
siblings behind Triel and Gromph. Jarlaxle liked Bladen’Kerst even
less than he liked Triel, for she was sadistic in the extreme. On sev 
eral occasions, the mercenary had thought he might have to kill her
in self defense. That would have been a difficult situation, though
Jarlaxle suspected that Matron Baenre, privately, would be glad to
have the wicked Bladen’Kerst dead. Even the powerful matron
mother couldn’t fully control that one.
	On Matron Baenre’s right stood another of Jarlaxle’s least
favorite beings, the illithid, Methil El Viddenvelp, the octopus 
headed advisor to Matron Baenre. He wore, as always, his unre 
markable, rich crimson robe, its sleeves long so that the creature
could keep its scrawny, three clawed hands tucked from sight. Jar 
laxle wished that the ugly creature would wear a mask and hood as
well. Its bulbous, purplish head, sporting four tentacles where its
mouth should have been, and milky white pupilless eyes, was
among the most repulsive things Jarlaxle had ever seen. Normally, if
gains could be made, the mercenary would have looked past a
being’s appearance, but Jarlaxle preferred to have little contact with
the ugly, mysterious, and ultimately deadly illithids.
	Most drow held similar feelings toward illithids, and it momen 
tarily struck Jarlaxle as odd that Matron Baenre would have El Vid 
denvelp so obviously positioned. When he scrutinized the female
drow facing Matron Baenre, though, the mercenary understood.
	She was scrawny and small, shorter than even Triel and appearing
much weaker. Her black robes were unremarkable, and she wore no
other visible equipment certainly not the attire befitting a matron
mother. But this drow, K’yorl Odran, was indeed a matron mother, 
leader of Oblodra, the third house of Menzoberranzan.
	K’yorl? Jarlaxle’s fingers motioned to Dantrag, the mercenary’s
facial expression incredulous. K’yorl was among the most despised
of Menzoberranzan’s rulers. Personally, Matron Baenre hated
K’yorl, and had many times openly expressed her belief that Men 
zoberranzan would be better off without the troublesome Odran.
The only thing that had stopped House Baenre from obliterating
Oblodra was the fact that the females of the third house possessed
mysterious powers of the mind. If anyone could understand the
motivations and private thoughts of mysterious and dangerous
K’yorl, it would be the illithid, El Viddenvelp.
	Three hundred, K’yorl was saying.
	Matron Baenre slumped back in her chair, a sour expression on
her face. A pittance, she replied.
	Half of my slave force, K’yorl responded, flashing her cus 
tomary grin, a well known signal that not so sly K’yorl was lying.
	Matron Baenre cackled, then stopped abruptly. She came for 
ward in her seat, her slender hands resting atop the fabulous dia 
monds, and her scowl unrelenting. Her ruby red eyes narrowed to
slits. She uttered something under her breath and removed one of
her hands from atop the diamond. The magnificent gem flared to
inner life and loosed a concentrated beam of purple light, striking
K’yorl’s attendant, an unremarkable male, and engulfing him in a
series of cascading, crackling arcs of purple glowing energy. He
cried out, threw his hands up in the air, and fought back against the
consuming waves.
	Matron Baenre, lifted her other hand and a second beam joined
the first. Now the male drow seemed like no more than a purple sil 
houette.
	Jarlaxle watched closely as K’yorl closed her eyes and furrowed
her brow. Her eyes came back open almost immediately, and she
stared with disbelief at El Viddenvelp. The mercenary was worldly
enough to realize that, in that split second, a battle of wills had just
occurred, and he was not surprised that the mind flayer had appar 
ently won out.
	The unfortunate Oblodran male was no more than a shadow by
then, and a moment later, he wasn’t even that. He was simply no
more.
	K’yorl Odran scowled fiercely, seemed on the verge of an explo 
sion, but Matron Baenre, as deadly as any drow alive, did not back
down.
	Unexpectedly, K’yorl grinned widely again and announced
lightheartedly, He was just a male.
	K’yorl! Baenre snarled. This duty is sanctified by Lloth, and
you shall cooperate!
	Threats? spoke K’yorl.
	Matron Baenre rose from her throne and walked right in front of
the unflinching K’yorl. She raised her left hand to the Oblodran
female’s cheek, and calm K’yorl couldn’t help but wince. On that
hand Matron Baenre wore a huge golden ring, its four uncompleted
bands shifting as though they were the eight legs of a living spider.
Its huge blue black sapphire shimmered. That ring, K’yorl knew, 
contained a living velsharess orbb, a queen spider, a far more deadly
cousin of the surface world’s black widow.
	You must understand the importance, Matron Baenre cooed.
	To Jarlaxle’s amazement (and he noted that Dantrag’s hand
immediately went to his sword hilt, as though the weapon master
would leap out of the extradimensional spying pocket and slay the
impudent Oblodran), K’yorl slapped Matron Baenre’s hand away.
	Barrison Del’Armgo has agreed, Matron Baenre said calmly, 
shifting her hand upright to keep her dangerous daughter and
illithid advisor from taking any action.
	K’yorl grinned, an obvious bluff, for the matron mother of the
third house could not be thrilled to hear that the first two houses 
had allied on an issue that she wanted to avoid.
	As has Faen Tlabbar, Matron Baenre added slyly, referring to
the city’s fourth house and Oblodra’s most hated rival. Baenre’s
words were an obvious threat, for with both House Baenre and
House Barrison Del’Armgo on its side, Faen Tlabbar would move
quickly to crush Oblodra and assume the city’s third rank.
	Matron Baenre slid back into her sapphire throne, never taking
her gaze from K’yorl.
	I do not have many house drow, K’yorl said, and it was the
first time Jarlaxle had ever heard the upstart Oblodran sound hum 
bled.
	No, but you have kobold fodder! Matron Baenre snapped.
And do not dare to admit to six hundred. The tunnels of the
Clawrift beneath House Oblodra are vast.
	I will give to you three thousand, K’yorl answered, appar 
ently thinking the better of some hard bargaining.
	Ten times that! Baenre growled.
	K’yorl said nothing, merely cocked her head back and looked
down her slender, ebon skinned nose at the first matron mother.
	I’ll settle for nothing less than twenty thousand, Matron
Baenre said then, carrying both sides of the bargaining. The
defenses of the dwarven stronghold will be cunning, and we’ll need
ample fodder to sort our way through.
	The cost is great, K’yorl said.
	Twenty thousand kobolds do not equal the cost of one drow
life, Baenre reminded her, then added, just for effect, in Lloth’s
eyes.
	K’yorl started to respond sharply, but Matron Baenre stopped
her at once.
	Spare me your threats! Baenre screamed, her thin neck seem 
ing even scrawnier with her jaw so tightened and jutting forward.
In Lloth’s eyes, this event goes beyond the fighting of drow houses, 
and I promise you, K’yorl, that the disobedience of House Oblodra
will aid the ascension of Faen Tlabbar!
	Jarlaxle’s eyes widened with surprise and he looked at Dantrag, 
who had no explanation. Never before had the mercenary heard, or
heard of, such a blatant threat, one house against another. No grin, 
no witty response, came from K’yorl this time. Studying the female, 
silent and obviously fighting to keep her features calm, Jarlaxle
could see the seeds of anarchy. K’yorl and House Oblodra would
not soon forget Matron Baenre’s threat, and given Matron Baenre’s
arrogance, other houses would undoubtedly foster similar resent 
ments. The mercenary nodded as he thought of his own meeting
with fearful Triel, who would likely inherit this dangerous situation.
	Twenty thousand, K’yorl quietly agreed, if that many of the
troublesome little rats can be herded.
	The matron mother of House Oblodra was then dismissed. As
she entered the marble cylinder, Dantrag dropped out of the end of
the spider filament and climbed from the extradimensional pocket, 
into the throne room.
	Jarlaxle went behind, stepping lightly to stand before the
throne. He swept into a low bow, the diatryma feather sticking from
the brim of his great hat brushing the floor. A most magnificent
performance, he greeted Matron Baenre. It was my pleasure that I
was allowed to witness.
	Shut up, Matron Baenre, leaning back in her throne and full of
venom, said to him.
	Still grinning, the mercenary came to quiet attention.
	K’yorl is a dangerous nuisance, Matron Baenre said. I will
ask little from her house drow, though their strange mind powers
would prove useful in breaking the will of resilient dwarves. All
that we need from them is kobold fodder, and since the vermin
breed like muck rats, their sacrifice will not be great.
	What about after the victory? Jarlaxle dared to ask.
	That is for K’yorl to decide, Matron Baenre replied immedi 
ately. She motioned then for the others, even her scribes, to leave the
room, and all knew that she meant to appoint Jarlaxle’s band to a
scouting mission at the very least on House Oblodra.
	They all went without complaint, except for wicked Bladen’
Kerst, who paused to flash the mercenary a dangerous glare.
Bladen’Kerst hated Jarlaxle as she hated all drow males, considering
them nothing more than practice dummies on which she could hone
her torturing techniques.
	The mercenary shifted his eye patch to the other eye and gave
her a lewd wink in response.
	Bladen’Kerst immediately looked to her mother, as if askingi
permission to beat the impertinent male senseless, but Matron
Baenre continued to wave her away.	I
	You want Bregan D’aerthe to keep close watch on House Obloj
dra, Jarlaxle reasoned as soon as he was alone with Baenre. Not such
an easy task
	No, Matron Baenre interrupted. Even Bregan D’aerthe could
not readily spy on that mysterious house.
	The mercenary was glad that Matron Baenre, not he, had beei~
the one to point that out. He considered the unexpected conclusion~
then grinned widely, and even dipped into a bow of salute as he
came to understand. Matron Baenre wanted the others, particularly
El ViddenveLp, merely to think that she would set Bregan D’aerthe
to spy on House Oblodra. That way, she could keep K’yorl some 
what off guard, looking for ghosts that did not exist.
	I care not for K’yorl, beyond my need of her slaves, Matron
Baenre went on. If she does not do as she is instructed in this mat 
ter, then House Oblodra will be dropped into the Clawrift and
forgotten.
	The matter of fact tones, showing supreme confidence, im 
pressed the mercenary. With the first and second houses aligned, 
what choice does K’yorl have? he asked.
	Matron Baenre pondered that point, as though Jarlaxle had
reminded her of something. She shook the notion away and quickly
went on. We do not have time to discuss your meeting with Triel, 
she said, and Jarlaxle was more than a little curious, for he had
thought that the primary reason for his visit to House Baenre. I
want you to begin planning our procession toward the dwarvish
home. I will need maps of the intended routes, as well as detailed
descriptions of the possible final approaches to Mithril Hall, so that
Dantrag and his generals might best plan the attack.
	Jarlaxle nodded. He certainly wasn’t about to argue with the
foul tempered matron mother. We could send spies deeper into the
dwarven complex, he began, but again, the impatient Baenre cut
him short.
	We need none, she said simply.
	Jarlaxle eyed her curiously. Our last expedition did not actu 
ally get into Mithril Hall, he reminded.
	Matron Baenre’s lips curled up in a perfectly evil smile, an infectious grin that made Jarlaxle eager to learn what revelation might be
coming. Slowly, the matron mother reached inside the front of her
fabulous robes, producing a chain on which hung a ring, bone white
and fashioned, so it appeared, out of a large tooth. Do you know of
this? she asked, holding the item up in plain view.
	It is said to be the tooth of a dwarf king, and that his trapped
and tormented soul is contained within the ring, the mercenary
replied.
	A dwarf king, Matron Baenre echoed. And there are not so
many dwarvish kingdoms, you see.
	Jarlaxle’s brow furrowed, then his face brightened. Mithril
Hall? he asked.
	Matron Baenre nodded. Fate has played me a marvelous coin 
cidence, she explained. Within this ring is the soul of Gandalug
Battlehammer, First King of Mithril Hall, Patron of Clan Battle 
hammer.
	Jarlaxle’s mind whirled with the possibilities. No wonder, then, 
that Lloth had instructed Vierna to go after her renegade brother!
Drizzt was just a tie to the surface, a pawn in a larger game of con 
quest.
	Gandalug talks to me, Matron Baenre explained, her voice as
content as a cat’s purr. He remembers the ways of Mithril Hall.
	Sos’Umptu Baenre entered then, ignoring Jarlaxle and walking
right by him to stand before her mother. The matron mother did not
rebuke her, as the mercenary would have expected for the unan 
nounced intrusion, but rather, turned a curious gaze her way and
allowed her to explain.
	Matron Mez’Barris Armgo grows impatient, Sos’Umptu said.
	In the chapel, Jarlaxle realized, for Sos’Umptu was caretaker of
the wondrous Baenre chapel and rarely left the place. The merce 
nary paused for just a moment to consider the revelation. Mez’Bar 
ris was the matron mother of House Barrison Del’Armgo, the city’s
second ranking house. But why would she be at the Baenre com 
pound if, as Matron Baenre had declared, Barrison Del’Armgo had
already agreed to the expedition?
Why indeed.
	Perhaps you should have seen to Matron Mez’Barris first, the
mercenary said slyly to Matron Baenre. The withered old matron
accepted his remark in good cheer; it showed her that her favorite
spy was thinking clearly.
	K’yorl was the more difficult, Baenre replied. To keep that
one waiting would have put her in a fouler mood than usual.
Mez’Barris is calmer by far, more understanding of the gains. She
will agree to the war with the dwarves.
	Matron Baenre walked by the mercenary to the marble cylinder;
Sos’Umptu was already inside, waiting. Besides, the first matron
mother added with a wicked grin, now that House Oblodra has
come into the alliance, what choice does Mez’Barris have?
	She was too beautiful, this old one, Jarlaxle agreed. Too beauti 
ful. He cast one final, plaintive look at the marvelous diamonds on
the arms of Baenre’s throne, then sighed deeply and followed the
two females out of House Baenre’s great stronghold.

Chapter 4
THE FIRE IN HER EYES


	Catti-brie pulled her gray cloak about her to hide the
dagger and mask she had taken from Regis. Mixed feel 
ings assaulted her as she neared Bruenor’s private
chambers; she hoped both that the dwarf would be
there, and that he would not.
	How could she leave without seeing Bruenor, her father, one
more time? And yet, the dwarf now seemed to Catti-brie a shell of
his former self, a wallowing old dwarf waiting to die. She didn’t
want to see him like that, didn’t want to take that image of Bruenor
with her into the Underdark.
	She lifted her hand to knock on the door to Bruenor’s sitting
room, then gently cracked the door open instead and peeked in. She
saw a dwarf standing off to the side of the burning hearth, but it
wasn’t Bruenor. Thibbledorf Pwent, the battlerager, hopped about
in circles, apparently trying to catch a pesky fly. He wore his sharp 
ridged armor (as always), complete with glove nails and knee and
elbow spikes, and other deadly points protruding from every plau 
sible angle. The armor squealed as the dwarf spun and jumped, an
irritating sound if Catti-brie had ever heard one. Pwent’s open 
faced gray helm rested in the chair beside him, its top spike half as
tall as the dwarf. Without it, Catti-brie could see, the battlerager was
almost bald, his remaining thin black strands of hair matted greasily
to the sides of his head, then giving way to an enormous, bushy
black beard.
	Catti-brie pushed the door a little farther and saw Bruenor sit 
ting before the low burning fire, absently trying to flip a log so that
its embers would flare to life again. His halfhearted poke against the
glowing log made Catti-brie wince. She remembered the days not so
long ago, when the boisterous king would have simply reached into
the hearth and smacked the stubborn log with his bare hand.
	With a look to Pwent (who was eating something that Catti-brie
sincerely hoped was not a fly), the young woman entered the room, 
checking her cloak as she came in to see that the items were prop 
erly concealed.
	“Hey, there!” Pwent howled between crunchy bites. Even more
than her disgust at the thought that he was eating a fly, Catti-brie
was amazed that he could be getting so much chewing out of it!
	“Ye should get a beard!” the battlerager called, his customary
greeting. From their first meeting, the dirty dwarf had told Catti 
brie that she’d be a handsome woman indeed if she could only grow
a beard.
	“I’m working at it, ” Catti-brie replied, honestly glad for the lev 
ity. “Ye’ve got me promise that I haven’t shaved me face since the
day we met.” She patted the battlerager atop the head, then regret 
ted it when she felt the greasy film on her hand.
	“There’s a good girl, ” Pwent replied. He spotted another flitting
insect and hopped away in pursuit.
	“Where ye going?” Bruenor demanded sharply before Catti-brie
could even say hello.
	Catti-brie sighed in the face of her father’s scowl. How she
longed to see Bruenor smile again! Catti-brie noted the bruise on
Bruenor ‘s forehead, the scraped portion finally scabbing over. He
had reportedly gone into a tirade a few nights before, and had actu 
ally smashed down a heavy wooden door with his head while two
frantic younger dwarves tried to hold him back. The bruise com 
bined with Bruenor ‘s garish scar, which ran from his forehead to the
side of his jaw, across one socket where his eye had once been, made
the old dwarf seem battered indeed!
	“Where ye going?” Bruenor asked again, angrily.
	“Settlestone, ” the young woman lied, referring to the town of
barbarians, Wulfgar’s people, down the mountain from Mithril
Hall’s eastern exit. “The tribe’s building a cairn to honor Wulfgar’s
memory.” Catti-brie was somewhat surprised at how easily the lie
came to her; she had always been able to charm Bruenor, often using
half truths and semantic games to get around the blunt truth, but
she had never so boldly lied to him.
	Reminding herself of the importance behind it all, she looked
the red bearded dwarf in the eye as she continued. “I’m wanting to
be there before they start building. If they’re to do it, then they’re to
do it right. Wulfgar deserves no less.”
	Bruenor ‘s one working eye seemed to mist over, taking on an
even duller appearance, and the scarred dwarf turned away from
Catti-brie, went back to his pointless fire poking, though he did
manage one slight nod of halfhearted agreement. It was no secret in
Mithril Hall that Bruenor didn’t like talking of Wulfgar, he had
even punched out one priest who insisted that Aegis fang could
not, by dwarvish tradition, be given a place of honor in the Hall of
Dumathoin, since a human, and no dwarf, had wielded it.
	Catti-brie noticed then that Pwent’s armor had ceased its
squealing, and she turned about to regard the battlerager. He stood
by the opened door, looking forlornly at her and at Bruenor’s back.
With a nod to the young woman, he quietly (for a rusty armored
battlerager) left the room.
	Apparently, Catti-brie was not the only one pained by the pitiful
wretch Bruenor Battlehammer had become.
	“Ye’ve got their sympathy, ” she remarked to Bruenor, who
seemed not to hear. “All in Mithril Hall speak kindly of their
wounded king.”
	“Shut yer face, ” Bruenor said out of the side of his mouth. He
still sat squarely facing the low fire.
	Catti-brie knew that the implied threat was lame, another
reminder of Bruenor’s fall. In days past, when Bruenor Battle 
hammer suggested that someone shut his face, he did, or Bruenor
did it for him. But, since the fights with the priest and with the door, 
Bruenor ‘s fire, like the one in the hearth, had played itself to its end.
	“Do ye mean to poke that fire the rest o’ yer days?” Catti-brie
asked, trying to incite a fight, to blow on the embers of Bruenor ‘s
pride.
	“If it pleases me, ” the dwarf retaliated too calmly.
	Catti-brie sighed again and pointedly hitched her cloak over the
side of her hip, revealing the magical mask and Entreri’s jeweled
dagger. Even though the young woman was determined to under 
take her adventure alone, and did not want to explain any of it to
Bruenor, she prayed that Bruenor would have life enough within
him to notice.
	Long minutes passed, quiet minutes, except for the occasional
crackle of the embers and the hiss of the unseasoned wood.
	“I’ll return when I return!” the flustered woman barked, and
she headed for the door. Bruenor absently waved her away over one
shoulder, never bothering to look at her.
	Catti-brie paused by the door, then opened it and quietly closed
it, never leaving the room. She waited a few moments, not believing
that Bruenor remained in front of the fire, poking it absently. Then
she slipped across the room and through another doorway, to the
dwarf’s bedroom.
	Catti-brie moved to Bruenor’s large oaken desk, a gift from
Wulfgar’s people, its polished wood gleaming and designs of
Aegis fang, the mighty warhammer that Bruenor had crafted, 
carved into its sides. Catti-brie paused a long while, despite her
need to be out before Bruenor realized what she was doing, and
looked at those designs, remembering Wulfgar. She would never get
over that loss. She understood that, but she knew, too, that her time
of grieving neared its end, that she had to get on with the business
of living. Especially now, Catti-brie reminded herself, with another
of her friends apparently walking into peril.
	In a stone coffer atop the desk Catti-brie found what she was
looking for: a small locket on a silver chain, a gift to Bruenor from
Alustriel, the Lady of Silverymoon. Bruenor had been thought dead, 
lost in Mithril Hall on the friends’ first passage through the place.
He had escaped from the halls sometime later, avoiding the evil
gray dwarves who had claimed Mithril Hall as their own, and with
Alustriel’s help, he found Catti-brie in Longsaddle, a village to the
southwest. Drizzt and Wulfgar had left long before that, on their
way south in pursuit of Regis, who had been captured by the assas 
sin Entreri.
	Alustriel had then given Bruenor the magical locket. Inside was
a tiny portrait of Drizzt, and with this device the dwarf could gener 
ally track the drow. Proper direction and distance from Drizzt could
be determined by the degrees of magical warmth emanating from
the locket.
	The metal bauble was cool now, colder than the air of the room, 
and it seemed to Catti-brie that Drizzt was already a long way from
her.
	Catti-brie opened the locket and regarded the perfect image of
her dear drow friend. She wondered if she should take it. With
Guenhwyvar she could likely follow Drizzt anyway, if she could get
on his trail, and she had kept it in the back of her mind that, when
Bruenor learned the truth from Regis, the fire would come into his
eyes, and he would rush off in pursuit.
	Catti-brie liked that image of fiery Bruenor, wanted her father to
come charging in to her aid, and to Drizzt’s rescue, but that was a
child’s hope, she realized, unrealistic and ultimately dangerous.
	Catti-brie shut the locket and snapped it up into her hand. She
slipped out of Bruenor’s bedroom and through his sitting room
(with the red bearded dwarf still seated before the fire, his thoughts
a million miles away), then rushed through the halls of the upper
levels, knowing that if she didn’t get on her way soon, she might
lose her nerve.
	Outside, she regarded the locket again and knew that in taking
it, she had cut off any chances that Bruenor would follow. She was
on her own.
	That was how it had to be, Catti-brie decided, and she slipped
the chain over her head and started down the mountain, hoping to
get to Silverymoon not so long after Drizzt.



	He slipped as quietly and unobtrusively as he could along the
dark streets of Menzoberranzan, his heat seeing eyes glowing ruby
red. All that he wanted was to get back to Jarlaxle’s base, back with
the drow who recognized his worth.
	“Waela rivvil!” came a shrill cry from the side.
	He stopped in his tracks, leaned wearily against the pile of bro 
ken stone near an unoccupied stalagmite mound. He had heard
those words often before, always those two words, said with obvi 
ous derision.
	“Waela rivvil!” the drow female said again, moving toward him, 
a russet tentacle rod in one hand, its three eight foot long arms
writhing of their own accord, eagerly, as though they wanted to lash
out with their own maliciousness and slap at him. At least the
female wasn’t carrying one of those whips of fangs, he mused, 
thinking of the multi snake headed weapons many of the higher 
ranking drow priestesses used.
	He offered no resistance as she moved to stand right in front of
him, respectfully lowered his eyes as Jarlaxle had taught him. He
suspected that she, too, was moving through the streets inconspicu 
ously, why else would a drow female, powerful enough to be car 
rying one of those wicked rods, be crawling about the alleys of this, 
the lesser section of Menzoberranzan?
	She issued a string of drow words in her melodic voice, too
quickly for this newcomer to understand. He caught the words
quarth, which meant command, and harl’iI’cik, or kneel, and
expected them anyway, for he was always being commanded to
kneel.
	Down he went, obediently and immediately, though the drop to
the hard stone pained his knees.
	The drow female paced slowly about him, giving him a long
look at her shapely legs, even pulling his head back so that he could
stare up into her undeniably beautiful face, while she purred her
name, “Jerlys.”
	She moved as if to kiss him, then slapped him instead, a sting 
ing smack on his cheek. Immediately, his hands went to his sword
and dirk, but he calmed and reminded himself of the consequences.
	Still the drow paced about him, speaking to herself as much as
to him. “Iblith, ” she said many times, the drow word for excrement, 
and finally he replied with the single word “abban, ” which meant
ally, again as Jarlaxle had coached him.
	“Abban del darthiir!” she cried back, smacking him again on the
back of his head, nearly knocking him flat to his face.
	He didn’t understand completely, but thought that dart hiir had
something to do with the faeries, the surface elves. He was begin 
ning to figure out then that he was in serious trouble this time, and
would not so easily get away from this one.
	“Abban del darthiir!” Jerlys cried again, and this time her tentacle
rod, and not her hand, snapped at him from behind, all three tenta 
cles pounding painfully into his right shoulder. He grabbed at the
wound and fell flat to the stone, his right arm useless and the waves
of pain rolling through him.
	Jerlys struck again, at his back, but his sudden movement had
saved him from a hit by all three of the tentacles.
	His mind raced. He knew that he had to act fast. The female
kept taunting him, smacking her rod against the alley walls, and
every so often against his bleeding back. He knew for certain then
that he had caught this female by surprise, that she was on a mis 
sion as secret as his own, and that he would not likely walk away
from this encounter.
	One of the tentacles slapped off the back of his head, dazing
him. Still his right arm remained dead, weakened by the magic of a
simultaneous three strike.
	But he had to act. He moved his left hand to his right hip, to his
dirk, then changed his mind and brought it around the other side.
	“Abban del darthiir!” Jerlys cried again, and her arm came for 
ward.
	He spun about and up to meet it, his sword, not of drow make, 
flaring angrily as it connected with the tentacles. There came a green
flash, and one tentacle fell free, but one of the others snaked its way
through the parry and hit him in the face.
	“Jivvin!” the amused drow cried the word for play, and she
elaborated most graciously, thanking him for his foolish retaliation, 
for making it all such fun.
	“Play with this, ” he said back at her, and he came forward, 
straight ahead with the sword.
	A globe of conjured darkness fell over him.
	“Jivvin!” Jerlys laughed again and came forward to smack with
her rod. But this one was no novice in fighting dark elves, and, to
the female’s surprise, she did not find him within her globe.
	Around the side of the darkness he came, one arm hanging
limp, but the other flashing this way and that in a marvelous dis 
play of swordsmanship. This was a drow female, though, highly
trained in the fighting arts and armed with a tentacle rod. She par 
ried and countered, scoring another hit, laughing all the while.
	She did not understand her opponent.
	He came in a straightforward lunge again, spun about to the left
as if to continue with a spinning overhand chop, then reversed his
grip on the weapon, pivoted back to the right, and heaved the
sword as though it were a spear.
	The weapon’s tip dove hungrily between the surprised female’s
breasts, sparking as it sliced through the fine drow armor.
	He followed the throw with a leaping somersault and kicked
both feet forward so that they connected on the quivering sword
hilt, plunging the weapon deeper into the malevolent female’s
chest.
	The drow fell back against the rock pile, stumbling over it until
the uneven wall of the stalagmite supported her at a half standing
angle, her red eyes locked in a wide stare.
	“A pity, Jerlys, ” he whispered into her ear, and he softly kissed
her cheek as he grasped the sword hilt and pointedly stepped on the
writhing tentacles to pin them down on the floor. “What pleasures
we might have known.”
	He pulled the sword free and grimaced as he considered the
implications of this drow female’s death. He couldn’t deny the satis 
faction, however, at taking back some of the control in his life. He
hadn’t gone through all his battles just to wind up a slave!
	He left the alley a short while later, with Jerlys and her rod
buried under the stones, and with a bounce returned to his step.

Chapter 5
OVER THE YEARS

	Drizzt felt the gazes on him. They were elven eyes, he
knew, likely staring down the length of readied arrows.
The ranger casually continued his trek through the
Moonwood, his weapons tucked away and the hood of
his forest green cloak back off his head, revealing his long mane of
white hair and his ebon skinned elven features.
	The sun made its lazy way through the leafy green trees, 
splotching the forest with dots of pale yellow. Drizzt did not avoid
these, as much to show the surface elves that he was no ordinary
drow as for his honest love of the warmth of sunlight. The trail was
wide and smooth, unexpected in a supposedly wild and thick forest.
As the minutes turned into an hour and the forest deepened
around him, Drizzt began to wonder if he might pass through the
Moonwood without incident. He wanted no trouble, certainly, 
wanted only to be on with, and be done with, his quest.
	He came into a small clearing some time later. Several logs had
been arranged into a square around a stone blocked fire pit. This
was no ordinary campsite, Drizzt knew, but a designated meeting
place, a shared campground for those who would respect the sover 
eignty of the forest and the creatures living within its sheltered
boughs.
	Drizzt walked the camp’s perimeter, searching the trees. Look 
ing to the moss bed at the base of one huge oak, the drow saw sev 
eral markings. Though time had blurred their lines, one appeared to
be a rearing bear, another a wild pig. These were the marks of
rangers, and with an approving nod, the drow searched the lower
boughs of the tree, finally discovering a well concealed hollow. He
reached in gingerly and pulled out a pack of dried food, a hatchet, 
and a skin filled with fine wine. Drizzt took only a small cup of the
wine, but regretted that he could not add anything to the cache, 
since he would need all the provisions he could carry, and more, in
his long trek through the dangerous Underdark.
	He replaced the stores after using the hatchet to split some
nearby deadwood, then gently carved his own ranger mark, the uni 
corn, in the moss at the base of the trunk and returned to the nearest
log to start a fire for his meal.
	“You are no ordinary drow, ” came a melodic voice from behind
him before his meal was even cooked. The language was Elvish, as
was the pitch of the voice, more melodic than that of a human.
	Drizzt turned slowly, understanding that several bows were
probably again trained on him from many different angles. A single
elf stood before him. She was a young maiden, younger than even
Drizzt, though Drizzt had lived only a tenth of his expected life. She
wore forest colors, a green cloak, much like Drizzt’s, and a brown
tunic and leggings, with a longbow resting easily over one shoulder
and a slender sword belted on one hip. Her black hair shone so as to
be bluish and her skin was so pale that it reflected that blue hue. Her
eyes, too, bright and shining, were blue flecked with gold. She was a
silver elf, a moon elf, Drizzt knew.
	In his years of living on the surface, Drizzt Do’Urden had
encountered few surface elves, and those had been gold elves. He
had encountered moon elves only once in his life, on his first trip to
the surface in a dark elf raid in which his kin had slaughtered an
small elf clan. That horrible memory rushed up at Drizzt as he faced
this beautiful and delicate creature. Only one moon elf had survived
that encounter, a young child that Drizzt had secretly buried
beneath her mother’s mutilated body. That act of treachery against
the evil drow had brought severe repercussions, costing Drizzt’s
family the favor of Lloth, and, in the end, costing Zak’nafein, 
Drizzt’s father, his life.
	Drizzt faced a moon elf once more, a maiden perhaps thirty
years of age, with sparkling eyes. The ranger felt the blood draining
from his face. Was this the region to which he and the drow raiders
had come?
	“You are no ordinary drow, ” the elf said again, still using the
Elvish tongue, her eyes flashing dangerously and her tone grim.
	Drizzt held his hands out to the side. He realized that he should
say something, but simply couldn’t think of any words, or couldn’t
get them past the lump in his throat.
	The elf maiden’s eyes narrowed; her lower jaw trembled, and
her hand instinctively dropped to the hilt of her sword.
	“I am no enemy, ” Drizzt managed to say, realizing that he must
either speak or, likely, fight.
	The maiden was on him in the blink of a lavender eye, sword
flashing.
	Drizzt never even drew his weapons, just stood with his hands
out wide, and his expression calm. The elf slid up short of him, her
sword raised. Her expression changed suddenly, as though she had
noticed something in Drizzt’s eyes.
	She screamed wildly and started to swing, but Drizzt, too quick
for her, leaped forward, caught her weapon arm in one hand, and
wrapped his other arm about her, pulling her close and hugging her
so tightly that she could not continue the fight. He expected her to
claw him, or even bite him, but, to his surprise, she fell limply into
his arms and slumped low, her face buried in his chest and her
shoulders bobbing with sobs.
	Before he could begin to speak words to comfort, Drizzt felt the
keen tip of an elven sword against the back of his neck. He let go of
the female immediately, his hands out wide once more, and another
elf, older and more stern, but with similarly beautiful features, came
from the trees to collect the young maiden and help her away.
	“I am no enemy, ” Drizzt said again.
	“Why do you cross the Moonwood?” the unseen elf behind him
asked in the Common tongue.
	“Your words are correct, ” Drizzt replied absently, for his
thoughts were still focused on the curious maiden. “I mean only to
cross the Moonwood, from the west to the east, and will bring no
harm to you or the wood.”
	“The unicorn, ” Drizzt heard another elf say from behind, from
near the huge oak tree. He figured that the elf had found his ranger
mark in the moss. To his relief, the sword was taken away from his
neck.
	Drizzt paused a long moment, figuring that it was the elves’
turn to speak. Finally, he mustered the nerve to turn about, only to
find that the moon elves were gone, disappeared into the brush.
	He thought of tracking them, was haunted by the image of that
young elven maiden, but realized that it was not his place to disturb
them in this, their forest home. He finished his meal quickly, made
sure that the area was cleaned and as he had found it, then gathered
up his gear and went on his way.
	Less than a mile down the trail, he came upon another curious
sight. A black and white horse, fully saddled, its bridle lined with
tinkling bells, stood quietly and calmly. The animal pawed the
ground when it saw the drow coming.
	Drizzt spoke softly and made quiet sounds as he eased over to
it. The horse visibly calmed, even nuzzled Drizzt when he got near.
The animal was fine, the ranger could tell, well muscled and well
groomed, though it was not a tall beast. Its coat held black and
white splotches, even on its face, with one eye surrounded by white, 
the other appearing as though it was under a black mask.
	Drizzt searched around, but found no other prints in the
ground. He suspected that the horse had been provided by the
elves, for him, but he couldn’t be sure, and he certainly didn’t want
to steal someone’s mount.
	He patted the horse on the neck and started to walk past. He
had gone only a few steps when the horse snorted and wheeled
about. It galloped around the drow and stood again before him on
the path.
	Curious, Drizzt repeated the movement, going by the beast, and
the horse followed suit to stand before him.
	“Did they tell you to do this?” Drizzt asked plainly, stroking the
animal’s muzzle.
	“Did you instruct him so?” Drizzt called loudly to the woods
around him. “I ask the elves of Moonwood, was this horse provided
for me?”
	All that came in response was the protesting chatter of some
birds disturbed by Drizzt’s shout.
	The drow shrugged and figured that he would take the horse to
the end of the wood; it wasn’t so far anyway. He mounted up and
galloped off, making great progress along the wide and flat trail.
	He came to the eastern end of Moonwood late that afternoon, 
long shadows rolling out from the tall trees. Figuring that the elves
had given him the mount only so that he could be gone of their realm
more quickly, he brought the horse to a halt, still under the shadows, 
meaning to dismount and send it running back into the forest.
	A movement across the wide field beyond the forest caught the
drow ranger’s eye. He spotted an elf atop a tall black stallion, just
outside the brush line, looking his way. The elf put his hands to his
lips and gave a shrill whistle, and Drizzt’s horse leaped out from the
shadows and ran across the thick grass.
	The elf disappeared immediately into the brush, but Drizzt did
not bring his horse up short. He understood then that the elves had
chosen to help him, in their distant way, and he accepted their gift
and rode on.
	Before he set camp that night, Drizzt noticed that the elven rider
was paralleling him, some distance to the south. It seemed that there
was a limit to their trust.



	Catti-brie had little experience with cities. She had been through
Luskan, had flown in an enchanted chariot over the splendor of
mighty Waterdeep, and had traveled through the great southern
city of Calimport. Nothing, though, had ever come close to the
sights that awaited her as she walked the wide and curving avenues
of Silverymoon. She had been here once before, but at the time, she
had been a prisoner of Artemis Entreri and had hardly noticed the
graceful spires and free flowing designs of the marvelous city.
	Silverymoon was a place for philosophers, for artists, a city
known for tolerance. Here an architect could let his imagination
soar along with a hundred foot spire. Here a poet could stand on the
street corner, spouting his art and earning a fair and honest living on
the trinkets that passersby happened to toss his way.
	Despite the seriousness of her quest, and the knowledge that
she soon might walk into darkness, a wide smile grew on Catti 
brie’s face. She understood why Drizzt had often gone from Mithril
Hall to visit this place; she never guessed that the world could be so
varied and wonderful.
	On impulse, the young woman moved to the side of one build 
ing, a few steps down a dark, though clean, alleyway. She took out
the panther figurine and set it on the cobblestones before her.
	“Come, Guenhwyvar, ” Catti-brie called softly. She didn’t know
if Drizzt had brought the panther into this city before or not, didn’t
know whether she was breaking any rules, but she believed that
Guenhwyvar should experience this place, and believed, too, for
some reason, that, in Silverymoon, she was free to follow her heart.
	A gray mist surrounded the figurine, swirled, and gradually
took shape. The great panther, six hundred pounds of inky black, 
muscled cat, its shoulders higher than Catti-brie’s waist, stood
before her. Its head turned from side to side as it tried to fathom
their location.
	“We’re in Silverymoon, Guen, ” Catti-brie whispered.
	The panther tossed its head, as though it had just awakened, 
and gave a low, calm growl.
	“Keep yerself close, ” Catti-brie instructed, “right by me side.
I’m not for knowing if ye should be here or not, but I wanted ye to
see the place, at least.”
	They came out of the alley side by side. “Have ye seen the place
before, Guen?” Catti-brie asked. “I’m looking for Lady Alustriel.
Might ye know where that’d be?”
	The panther bumped close to Catti-brie’s leg and moved off, 
apparently with purpose, and Catti-brie went right behind. Many
heads turned to regard the curious couple, the road dirty woman
and her unusual companion, but the gazes were innocuous enough, 
and not one person screamed or hurried away in fright.
	Coming around one sweeping avenue, Guenhwyvar almost ran
headfirst into a pair of talking elves. They jumped back instinctively
and looked from the panther to the young woman.
	“Most marvelous!” one of them said in a singsong voice.
	“Incredible, ” the other agreed. He reached toward the panther
slowly, testing the reaction. “May I?” he asked Catti-brie.
	She didn’t see the harm and nodded.
	The elf’s face beamed as he ran his slender fingers along Guen 
hwyvar ‘s muscled neck. He looked to his more hesitant companion, 
his smile seeming wide enough to take in his ears.
	“Oh, buy the cat!” the other agreed excitedly.
	Catti-brie winced, Guenhwyvar’s ears flattened, and the pan 
ther let out a roar that echoed about the buildings throughout the
city.
	Catti-brie knew that elves were fast afoot, but these two were
out of sight before she could even explain to them their mistake.
“Guenhwyvar!” she whispered harshly into the panther’s flattened
ear.
	The cat’s ears came up, and the panther turned and rose on its
haunches, putting a thick paw atop each of Catti-brie’s shoulders. It
bumped its head into Catti-brie’s face and twisted to rub against her
smooth cheek. Catti-brie had to struggle just to keep her balance
and it took her a long while to explain to the panther that the apol 
ogy was accepted.
	As they went on, pointing fingers accompanied the stares, and
more than one person slipped across the avenues ahead to get on
the opposite side of the street and let the woman and cat pass. Catti 
brie knew that they had attracted too much attention; she began to
feel foolish for bringing Cuenhwyvar here in the first place. She
wanted to dismiss the cat back to the Astral Plane, but she suspected
that she couldn’t do so without attracting even more attention.
	She wasn’t surprised a few moments later, when a host of
armed soldiers wearing the new silver and light blue uniforms of
the city guard, surrounded her at a comfortable distance.
	“The panther is with you, ” one of them reasoned.
	“Guenhwyvar, ” Catti-brie replied. “I am Catti-brie, daughter of
Bruenor Battlehammer, Eighth King of Mithril Hall.”
	The man nodded and smiled, and Catti-brie relaxed with a deep
sigh.
	“It is indeed the drow’s cat!” another of the guardsmen blurted.
He blushed at his uncalled for outburst, looked to the leader, and
promptly lowered his eyes.
	“Aye, Guen’s the friend of Drizzt Do’Urden, ” Catti-brie replied.
“Is he about in the city?” she couldn’t help asking, though, logically, 
she would have preferred to ask the question of Alustriel, who
might give her a more complete answer.
	“Not that I have heard, ” replied the guard leader, “but Silvery 
moon is honored by your presence, Princess of Mithril Hall.” He
dipped a low bow, and Catti-brie blushed, not used to, or comfort 
able with, such treatment.
	She did well to hide her disappointment about the news, 
reminding herself that finding Drizzt was not likely to be easy. Even
if Drizzt had come into Silverymoon, he had probably done so
secretly.
	“I have come to speak with Lady Alustriel, ” Catti-brie ex 
plained.
	“You should have been escorted from the gate, ” the guard
leader groused, angered by the lack of proper protocol.
	Catti-brie understood the man’s frustration and realized that
she had probably just gotten the unwitting soldiers at the Moon 
bridge, the invisible structure spanning the great River Rauvin, in
trouble. “They did not know me name, ” she added quickly, “or me
quest. I thought it best to come through on me own and see what I
might.”
	“They did not question the presence of such a, ” He wisely
caught himself before saying “pet.” “A panther?” he went on.
	“Guen was not beside me, ” Catti-brie replied without thinking, 
then her face crinkled up, realizing the million questions she had
probably just inspired.
	Fortunately, the guards did not belabor the point. They had
heard enough descriptions of the impassioned young woman to be
satisfied that this was indeed the daughter of Bruenor Battle 
hammer. They escorted Catti-brie and Guenhwyvar (at a respectful
distance) through the city, to the western wall and the graceful and
enchanting palace of Lady Alustriel.
	Left alone in a waiting chamber, Catti-brie decided to keep
Guenhwyvar by her side. The panther’s presence would give her
tale credibility, she decided, and if Drizzt had been about, or still
was, Guenhwyvar would sense it.
	The minutes slipped by uneventfully, and restless Catti-brie
grew bored. She moved to a side door and gently pushed it open, 
revealing a decorated powder room, with a wash basin and a small, 
gold trimmed table, complete with a large mirror. Atop it was an
assortment of combs and brushes, a selection of small vials, and an
opened coffer containing many different colored packets of dye.
	Curious, the young woman looked over her shoulder to make
sure that all was quiet, then moved in and sat down. She took up a
brush and roughly ran it through her tangled and thick auburn hair, 
thinking she should try to appear her best when standing before the
Lady of Silverymoon. She scowled when she noticed dirt on her
cheek, and quickly dipped her hand in the water basin and rubbed
it roughly over the spot, managing a smile when it was gone.
	She peeked out of the anteroom again, to make sure that no one
had come. Guenhwyvar, lying comfortably on the floor, looked up
and growled.
	“Oh, shut yer mouth, ” Catti-brie said, and she slipped back into
the powder room and inspected the vials. She removed the tight top
of one and sniffed, and her blue eyes opened wide in surprise at the
powerful aroma. From outside the door, Guenhwyvar growled
again and sneezed, and Catti-brie laughed. “I know what ye mean, ”
she said to the cat.
	Catti-brie went through several of the vials, crinkling her nose
at some, sneezing at more than one, and finally finding one whose
aroma she enjoyed. It reminded her of a field of wildflowers, not
overpowering, but subtly beautiful, the background music to a
spring day.
	She nearly jumped out of her boots, nearly stuffed the vial up
her nose, when a hand grasped her shoulder.
	Catti-brie spun about, and her breath was stolen away. There
stood Alustriel, it had to be!, her hair shining silver and hanging
halfway down her back and her eyes sparkling more clearly than
any Catti-brie had ever seen, more clearly than any eyes except
Wulfgar’s sky blue orbs. The memory pained her.
	Alustriel was fully half a foot above Catti-brie’s five and a half, 
and gracefully slender. She wore a purple gown of the finest silk, 
with many layers that seemed to hug her womanly curves and hide
them alluringly all at once. A high crown of gold and gems sat atop
her head.
	Guenhwyvar and the lady apparently were not strangers, for
the panther lay quietly on its side, eyes closed contentedly.
	For some reason that she did not understand, that bothered
Catti-brie.
	“I have wondered when we would at last meet, ” Alustriel said
quietly.
	Catti-brie fumbled to replace the cap on the vial and replace it
on the table, but Alustriel put her long, slender hands over the
young woman’s (and Catti-brie felt like a young and foolish girl at
that moment!) and eased the vial into her belt pouch instead.
	“Drizzt has spoken often of you, ” Alustriel went on, “and
fondly.”
	That thought, too, bothered Catti-brie. It might have been unin 
tentional, she realized, but it seemed to her that Alustriel was being
just a bit condescending. And Catti-brie, standing in road dusty
traveling clothes, with her hair hardly brushed, certainly was not
comfortable beside the fabulous woman.
	“Come to my private chambers, ” the lady invited. “There we
might speak more comfortably.” She started out, stepping over the
sleeping panther. “Do come along, Guen!” she said, and the cat
perked up immediately, shaking away its laziness.
	“Guen?” Catti-brie mouthed silently. She had never heard any 
one besides herself, and very rarely Drizzt, call the panther so
familiarly. She gave a look to the cat, her expression hurt, as she
obediently followed Alustriel out of the room.
	What had at first seemed to Catti-brie an enchanted palace now
made her feel terribly out of place as Alustriel led her along the
sweeping corridors and through the fabulous rooms. Catti-brie kept
looking to her own trail, wondering fearfully if she might be leaving
muddy tracks across the polished floors.
	Attendants and other guests, true nobility, the young woman
realized, stared as the unlikely caravan passed, and Catti-brie
could not return the gazes. She felt small, so very small, as she
walked behind the tall and beautiful Alustriel.
	Catti-brie was glad when they entered Alustriel’s private sitting
room and the lady closed the door behind them.
	Guenhwyvar padded over and hopped up on a thickly uphol 
stered divan, and Catti-brie’s eyes widened in shock.
	“Get off there!” she whispered harshly at the panther, but Alus 
triel only chuckled as she walked past, dropping a hand absently on
the comfortable cat’s head and motioning for Catti-brie to take a
seat.
	Again Catti-brie turned an angry gaze on Guenhwyvar, feeling
somewhat betrayed. How many times had Guenhwyvar plopped
down on that very same couch? she wondered.
	“What brings the daughter of King Bruenor to my humble
city?” Alustriel asked. “I wish I had known that you would be com 
ing. I could have better prepared.”
	“I seek Drizzt, ” Catti-brie answered curtly, then winced and sat
back at the sharper than intended tone of her reply.
	Alustriel’s expression immediately grew curious. “Drizzt?” she
echoed. “I have not seen Drizzt in some time. I had hoped that you
would tell me that he, too, was in the city, or at least on his way.
	Suspicious as she was, thinking that Drizzt would try to avoid
her and that Alustriel would undoubtedly go along with his wishes, 
Catti-brie found that she believed the woman.
	“Ah, well.” Alustriel sighed, sincerely and obviously disap 
pointed. She perked up immediately. “And how is your father?” she
asked politely. “And that handsome Wulfgar?”
	Alustriel’s expression changed suddenly, as though she had
just realized that something must be terribly out of place. “Your
wedding?” she asked hesitantly as Catti-brie’s lips thinned in a
scowl. “I was preparing to visit Mithril Hall..
	Alustriel paused and studied Catti-brie for a long while.
	Catti-brie sniffed and braced herself. “Wulfgar is dead, ” she
said evenly, “and me father is not as ye remember him. I’ve come in
search of Drizzt, who has gone out from the halls.”
	“What has happened?” Alustriel demanded.
	Catti-brie rose from her chair. “Guenhwyvar!” she called, rous 
ing the panther. “I’ve not the time for tales, ” she said curtly to Alus 
triel. “If Drizzt has not come to Silverymoon, then I’ve taken too
much of yer time already, and too much o’ me own.”
	She headed for the door and noticed it briefly glow blue, its
wood seeming to expand and tighten in the jam. Catti-brie walked
up to it anyway and tugged on the handle, to no avail.
	Catti-brie took a few deep breaths, counted to ten, then to
twenty, and turned to face Alustriel.
	“I’ve a friend needing me, ” she explained, her tone even and
dangerous. “Ye’d best be opening the door.” In days to come, when
she looked back on that moment, Catti-brie would hardly believe
that she had threatened Alustriel, the ruler of the northwest’s largest
and most powerful inland city! She had threatened Alustriel, rep 
utably among the most powerful mages in all the north!
	At that time, though, the fiery young woman meant every grim
word.
	“I can help, ” Alustriel, obviously worried, offered. “But first
you must tell me what has transpired.”
	“Drizzt hasn’t the time, ” Catti-brie growled. She tugged futilely
on the wizard locked door again, then banged a fist against it and
looked over her shoulder to glare at Alustriel, who had risen and
was slowly walking her way. Guenhwyvar remained on the divan, 
though the cat had lifted its head and was regarding the two
intently.
	“I have to find him, ” Catti-brie said.
	“And where will you look?” replied Alustriel, her hands out
defenselessly as she stepped before the young woman.
	The simple question took the bluster out of Catti-brie’s ire.
Where indeed? she wondered. Where to even begin? She felt help 
less, standing there, in a place she did not belong. Helpless and fool 
ish and wanting nothing more than to be back home, beside her
father and her friends, beside Wulfgar and Drizzt, with everything
the way it had been.. . before the dark elves had come to Mithril
Hall.
 
Chapter 6
DIVINE SIGN

	Catti-brie awoke the next morning on a pillowy soft bed
in a plush chamber filled with fine lace draperies that
let the filtered sunrise gently greet her sleepy gaze. She
was not used to such places, wasn’t even used to sleep 
ing above ground.
	She had refused a bath the night before, even though Lady
Alustriel had promised her that the exotic oils and soaps would
bubble around her and refresh her. To Catti-brie’s dwarven reared
sensibilities, this was all nonsense and, worse, weakness. She
bathed often, but in the chill waters of a mountain stream and
without scented oils from far off lands. Drizzt had told her that the
dark elves could track enemies by their scent for miles through the
Underdark’s twisting caverns, and it seemed silly to Catti-brie to
bath in aromatic oils and possibly aid her enemies.
	This morning, though, with the sun cascading through the
gauzy curtains, and the wash basin filled again with steamy water, 
the young woman reconsidered. “Suren ye’re a stubborn one, ” she
quietly accused Lady Alustriel, realizing that Alustriel’s magic was
likely the reason that steam once again rose off the water.
	Catti-brie eyed the line of bottles and considered the long and
dirty road ahead, a road from which she might never return. Some 
thing welled inside her then, a need to indulge herself just once, and
before her pragmatic side could argue, she had stripped off her
clothes and was sitting in the hot tub, the fizzing bubbles thick
about her.
	At first, she kept glancing nervously to the room’s door, but
soon she just let herself sink lower in the tub, perfectly relaxed, her
skin warm and tingling.
	“I told you.” The words jolted Catti-brie from her near slumber.
She sat up straight, then sank back immediately, embarrassed, as
she noticed not only Lady Alustriel, but a curious dwarf, his beard
and hair snowy white and his gowns silken and flowing.
	“In Mithril Hall, we’ve the habit o’ knocking before we go into
someone’s private room, ” Catti-brie, regaining a measure of her dig 
nity, remarked.
	“I did knock, ” Alustriel replied. “You were lost in the warmth of
the bath.”
	Catti-brie brushed her wet hair back from her face, getting a
handful of suds on her cheek. She managed to salvage her pride and
ignore the froth for a moment, then angrily slapped it away.
	Alustriel merely smiled.
	“Ye can be leaving, ” she snapped at the too dignified lady.
	“Drizzt is indeed making for Menzoberranzan, ” Alustriel
announced, and Catti-brie came forward again, anxiously, her
embarrassment lost in the face of more important news.
	“I ventured into the spirit world last night, ” Alustriel explained.
“There one might find many answers. Drizzt traveled north of
Silverymoon, through the Moonwood, on a straight line for the
mountains surrounding Dead Orc Pass.”
	Catti-brie’s expression remained quizzical.
	“That is where Drizzt first walked from the Underdark, ” Alus 
triel went on, “in a cave east of the fabled pass. It is my guess that he
means to return by the same route that led him from the darkness.”
	“Get me there, ” the young woman demanded, rising from the
water, too intent for modesty.
	“I will provide mounts, ” Alustriel said as she handed the
younger woman a thick towel. “Enchanted horses will allow you to
speed across the land. The journey should take you no more than
two days.”
	“Ye cannot use yer magic to just send me there?” Catti-brie
asked. Her tone was sharp, as though she believed that Alustriel
was not doing all that she could.
	“I do not know cave’s location, ” the silver haired lady
explained.
	Catti-brie stopped toweling herself, nearly dropped her cloth 
ing, which she had gathered together, and stared blankly, helplessly.
	“That is why I have brought Fret, ” Alustriel explained, holding
up a hand to calm the young woman.
	“Fredegar Rockcrusher, ” the dwarf corrected in a strangely
melodic, singsong voice, and he swept his arm out dramatically and
dipped a graceful bow. Catti-brie thought he sounded somewhat
like an elf trapped in a dwarf’s body. She furrowed her brow as she
closely regarded him for the first time; she had been around
dwarves all of her life and had never seen one quite like this. His
beard was neatly trimmed, his robes perfectly clean, and his skin
did not show the usual hardness, rockiness. Too many baths in
scented oils, the young woman decided, and she looked contemptu 
ously at the steaming tub.
	“Fret was with the party that first tracked Drizzt from the
Underdark, ” Alustriel continued. “After Drizzt had left the area, my
curious sister and her companions backtracked the drow’s trail and
located the cave, the entrance to the deep tunnels.
	“I hesitate to point the way for you, ” the Lady of Silverymoon
said after a long pause, her concern for the young woman’s safety
evident in her tone and expression.
	Catti-brie’s blue eyes narrowed, and she quickly pulled on her
breeches. She would not be looked down upon, not even by Alus 
triel, and would not have others deciding her course.
	“I see, ” remarked Alustriel with a nod of her head. Her immedi 
ate understanding set Catti-brie back.
	Alustriel motioned for Fret to retrieve Catti-brie’s pack. A sour
expression crossed the tidy dwarf’s face as he moved near the dirty
thing, and he lifted it gingerly by two extended fingers. He glanced
forlornly at Alustriel, and when she did not bother to look back at
him, he left the room.
	“I did not ask ye for any companion, ” Catti-brie stated bluntly.
	“Fret is a guide to the entrance, ” Alustriel corrected, “and noth 
ing more. Your courage is admirable, if a bit blind, ” she added, and
before the young woman could find the words to reply, Alustriel
was gone.
	Catti-brie stood silently for a few moments, water from her wet
hair dripping down her bare back. She fought away the feeling that
she was just a little girl in a big and dangerous world, that she was
small indeed beside the tall and powerful Lady Alustriel.
	But the doubts lingered.
	Two hours later, after a fine meal and a check on provisions, 
Catti-brie and Fret walked out of Silverymoon’s eastern gate, the
Sundabar Gate, beside Lady Alustriel, an entourage of soldiers
keeping a respectful but watchful distance from their leader.
	A black mare and a shaggy gray pony awaited the two travelers.
	“Must I?” Fret asked for perhaps the twentieth time since they
had left the castle. “Would not a detailed map suffice?”
	Alustriel just smiled and otherwise ignored the tidy dwarf. Fret
hated anything that might get him dirty, anything that would keep
him from his duties as Alustriel’s best loved sage. Certainly the
road into the wilds near Dead Orc Pass qualified on both counts.
	“The horseshoes are enchanted, and your mounts will fly like
the wind itself, ” Alustriel explained to Catti-brie. The silver haired
woman looked over her shoulder to the grumbling dwarf.
	Catti-brie was not quick to respond, offered no thanks for Alus 
triel’s effort. She had said nothing to Alustriel since their meeting
earlier that morning, and had carried herself with an unmistakably
cool demeanor.
	“With luck, you will arrive at the cave before Drizzt, ” Alustriel
said. “Reason with him and bring him home, I beg. He has no place
in the Underdark, not anymore.
	“Drizzt’s ‘place’ is his own to decide, ” Catti-brie retorted, but
she was really implying that her own place was hers to decide.
	“Of course, ” Alustriel agreed, and she flashed that smile, that
knowing grin that Catti-brie felt belittled her, again.
	“I did not hinder you, ” Alustriel pointed out. “I have done my
best to aid your chosen course, whether I think it a wise choice or
not.”
	Catti-brie snickered. “Ye just had to add that last thought, ” she
replied.
	“Am I not entitled to my opinion?” Alustriel asked.
	“Entitled to it and givin’ it to all who’ll hear, ” Catti-brie
remarked, and Alustriel, though she understood the source of the
young woman’s demeanor, was plainly surprised.
	Catti-brie snickered again and kicked her horse into a walk.
	“You love him, ” Alustriel said.
	Catti-brie pulled hard on the reins to stop her horse and turn it
halfway about. Now she wore the expression of surprise.
	“The drow, ” Alustriel said, more to bolster her last statement, to
reveal her honest belief, than to clarify something that obviously
needed no further explanation.
	Catti-brie chewed on her lip, as though seeking a response, then
turned her mount roughly about and kicked away.
	“It’s a long road, ” Fret whined.
	“Then hurry back to me, ” Alustriel said, “with Catti-brie and
Drizzt beside you.”
	“As you wish, my lady, ” the obedient dwarf replied, kicking his
pony into a gallop. “As you wish.”
	Alustriel stood at the eastern gate, watching, long after Catti 
brie and Fret had departed. It was one of those not so rare moments
when the Lady of Silverymoon wished that she was not encum 
bered with the responsibilities of government. Truly, Alustriel
would have preferred to grab a horse of her own and ride out beside
Catti-brie, even to venture into the Underdark. if necessary, to find
the remarkable drow that had become her friend.
	But she could not. Drizzt Do’Urden, after all, was a small player
in a wide world, a world that continually begged audience at the
Lady of Silverymoon’s busy court.
	“Good speed, daughter of Bruenor, ” the beautiful, silver haired
woman said under her breath. “Good speed and fare well.”



	Drizzt eased his mount along the stony trail, ascending into the
mountains. The breeze was warm and the sky clear, but a storm had
hit this region in the last few days, and the trail remained somewhat
muddy. Finally, fearing that his horse would slip and break a leg, 
Drizzt dismounted and led the beast carefully, cautiously.
	He had seen the shadowing elf many times that morning, for
the trails were fairly open, and in the up and down process of
climbing mountains, the two riders were not often far apart. Drizzt
was not overly surprised when he went around a bend to find the
elf approaching from a trail that had been paralleling his own.
	The pale skinned elf, too, walked his mount, and he nodded in
approval to see Drizzt doing likewise. He paused, still twenty feet
from the drow, as though he did not know how he should react.
	“If you have come to watch over the horse, then you might as
well ride, or walk, beside me, ” Drizzt called. Again the elf nodded, 
and he walked his shining black stallion up to the side of Drizzt’s
black and white mount.
	Drizzt looked ahead, up the mountain trail. “This will be the
last day I will need the horse, ” he explained. “I do not know that I
will ride again, actually.”
	“You do not mean to come out of these mountains?” the elf
asked.
	Drizzt ran a hand through his flowing white mane, surprised by
the finality of those words, and by their truth.
	“I seek a grove not far from here, ” he said, “once the home of
Montolio DeBrouchee.”
	“The blind ranger, ” the elf acknowledged.
	Drizzt was surprised by the elf’s recognition. He considered his
pale companion’s reply and studied him closely. Nothing about the
moon elf indicated that he was a ranger, but he knew of Montolio.
“It is fitting that the name Montolio DeBrouchee lives on in legend, ”
the drow decided aloud.
	“And what of the name Drizzt Do’Urden?” the moon elf, full of
surprises, asked. He smiled at Drizzt’s expression and added, “Yes, I
know of you, dark elf.”
	“Then you have the advantage, ” Drizzt remarked.
	“I am Tarathiel, ” the moon elf said. “It was no accident that you
were met on your passage through the Moonwood. When my small
clan discovered that you were afoot, we decided that it would be
best for Ellifain to meet you.”
	“The maiden?” Drizzt reasoned.
	Tarathiel nodded, his features seeming almost translucent in the
sunlight. “We did not know how she would react to the sight of a
drow. You have our apologies.”
	Drizzt nodded his acceptance. “She is not of your clan, ” he
guessed. “Or at least, she was not, not when she was very young.”
	Tarathiel did not reply, but the intrigue that was splayed across
his face showed Drizzt that he was on the right track.
	“Her people were slaughtered by drow, ” Drizzt went on, fear 
ing the expected confirmation.
	“What do you know?” Tarathiel demanded, his voice taking a
hard edge for the first time in the conversation.
	“I was among that raiding party, ” Drizzt admitted. Tarathiel
went for his sword, but Drizzt, lightning fast, grabbed hold of his
wrist.
	“I killed no elves, ” Drizzt explained. “The only ones I wanted to
fight were those who had accompanied me to the surface.”
	Tarathiel’s muscles relaxed, and he pulled his hand away. “Elli 
fain remembers little of the tragedy. She speaks of it more in dreams
than in her waking hours, and then she rambles.” He paused and
stared Drizzt squarely in the eye. “She has mentioned purple eyes, 
he said. “We did not know what to make of that, and she, when
questioned about it, cannot offer any answers. Purple is not a com 
mon color for drow eyes, so say our legends.”
	“It is not, ” Drizzt confirmed, and his voice was distant as he
remembered again that terrible day so long ago. This was the elf
maiden! The one that a younger Drizzt Do’Urden had risked all to
save, the one whose eyes had shown Drizzt beyond doubt that the
ways of his people were not the ways of his heart.
	“And so, when we heard of Drizzt Do’Urden, drow friend, 
drow friend with purple eyes, of the dwarven king that has
reclaimed Mithril Hall, we thought that it would be best for Ellifain
to face her past, ” Tarathiel explained.
	Again Drizzt, his mind looking more to the past than to the
mountain scenery about him, merely nodded.
	Tarathiel let it go at that. Ellifain had, apparently, viewed her
past, and the sight had nearly broken her.
	The moon elf refused Drizzt’s request for him to take the horses
and leave and, later that day, the two were riding again, along a nar 
row trail on a high pass, a way that Drizzt remembered well. He
thought of Montolio, Mooshie, his surface mentor, the blind old
ranger who could shoot a bow by the guidance of a pet owl’s hoots.
Montolio had been the one to teach a younger Drizzt of a god figure
that embodied the same emotions that stirred Drizzt’s heart and the
same precepts that guided the renegade drow’s conscience. Mielikki
was her name, goddess of the forest, and since his time with Monto 
ho, Drizzt Do’Urden had walked under her silent guidance.
	Drizzt felt a wellspring of emotions bubbling within him as the
trail wound away from the ridge and climbed a steeper incline
through a region of broken boulders. He was terrified of what he
might find. Perhaps an orc horde, the wretched humanoids were
all too common in this region, had taken over the old ranger’s
wondrous grove. Suppose a fire had burned it away, leaving a bar 
ren scar upon the land?
	They came into a thick copse of trees, plodding along a narrow
but fairly clean trail, with Drizzt in the lead. He saw the wood thin 
fling ahead, and beyond it a small field. He stopped his black and 
white horse and glanced back at Tarathiel.
	“The grove, ” he explained, and he slipped from his saddle, 
Tarathiel doing likewise. They tethered the horses under the cover
of the copse and crept side by side to the wood’s end.
	There stood Mooshie’s grove, perhaps sixty yards across, north
to south, and half that wide. The pines stood tall and straight, no
fire had struck this grove, and the rope bridges that the blind
ranger had constructed could still be seen running from tree to tree
at various heights. Even the low stone wall stood intact, not a rock
out of place, and the grass was low.
	“Someone is living in there, ” Tarathiel reasoned, for the place
had obviously not grown wild. When he looked to Drizzt, he saw
that the drow, features set and grim, had scimitars in his hands, one
glowing a soft bluish light.
	Tarathiel strung his long bow as Drizzt crawled out from the
brush and skittered over to the rock wall. Then the moon elf rushed
off, joining his drow companion.
	“1 have seen the signs of many orcs since we entered the moun 
tains, ” Tarathiel whispered. He pulled back on his bowstring and
nodded grimly. “For Montolio?”
	Drizzt returned the nod and inched up to peek over the stone
wall. He expected to see orcs, and expected to see dead orcs soon
after.
	The drow froze in place, his arms falling limply at his sides and
his breath suddenly hard to come by.
	Tarathiel nudged him, looking for an answer, but with none
forthcoming, the elf took up his bow and peeked over the wall.
	At first he saw nothing, but then he followed Drizzt’s unblink 
ing gaze to the south, to a small break in the trees, where a branch
was bobbing as though something had just brushed against it.
Tarathiel caught a flash of white from the shadows beyond. A horse, 
he thought.
	It came from the shadows then, a powerful steed wearing a coat
of gleaming white. Its unusual eyes glowed fiery pink, and an ivory
horn, easily half the height of the elf’s body, protruded from its fore 
head. The unicorn looked in the companions’ general direction, 
pawed the ground, and snorted.
	Tarathiel had the good sense to duck low, and he pulled the
stunned Drizzt Do’Urden down beside him.
	“Unicorn!” the elf mouthed silently to Drizzt, and the drow’s
hand instinctively went under the front collar of his traveling cloak, 
to the unicorn’s head pendant Regis had carved for him from the
bone of a knucklehead trout.
	Tarathiel pointed back to the thick copse of trees and signaled
that he and Drizzt should be leaving, but the drow shook his head.
His composure returned, Drizzt again peeked over the stone wall.
	The area was clear, with no indication that the unicorn was
about.
	“We should be gone, ” Tarathiel said, as soon as he, too, discerned
that the powerful steed was no longer close. “Take heart that Mon 
tolio’s grove is in the best of care.”
	Drizzt sat up on the wall, peering intently into the tangle of
pines. A unicorn! The symbol of Mielikki, the purest symbol of the
natural world. To a ranger, there was no more perfect beast, and to
Drizzt, there could be no more perfect guardian for the grove of
Montohio DeBrouchee. He would have liked to remain in the area
for some time, would have dearly liked to glimpse the elusive crea 
ture again, but he knew that time was pressing and that dark corri 
dors awaited.
	He looked to Tarathiel and smiled, then turned to leave.
	But he found the way across the small field blocked by the
mighty unicorn.
	“How did she do that?” Tarathiel asked. There was no need to
whisper anymore, for the unicorn was staring straight at them, paw 
ing the ground nervously and rolling its powerful head.
	“He, ” Drizzt corrected, noticing the steed’s white beard, a trait
of the male unicorn. A thought came over Drizzt then, and he
slipped his scimitars into their sheaths and hopped up from his seat.
	“How did he do that?” Tarathiel corrected. “I heard no hoof 
beats.” The elf’s eyes brightened suddenly, and he looked back to
the grove. “Unless there are more than one!”
	“There is only one, ” Drizzt assured him. “There is a bit of magic
within a unicorn, as this one, by slipping behind us, has proven.
	“Go around to the south, ” Tarathiel whispered. “And I will go
north. If we do not threaten the beast, ...” The moon elf stopped, 
seeing that Drizzt was already moving, straight out from the wall.
	“Take care, ” Tarathiel warned. “Beautiful indeed are the uni 
corns, but, by all accounts, they can be dangerous and unpre 
dictable.”
	Drizzt held a hand up behind him to silence the elf and contin 
ued his slow pace from the stone wall. The unicorn neighed and
tossed its great head, mane flying wildly. It slammed a hoof into the
ground, digging a fair sized hole in the soft turf.
	“Drizzt Do’Urden, ” Tarathiel warned.
	By all reasoning, Drizzt should have turned back. The unicorn
could have easily run him down, squashed him into the prairie, and
the great beast seemed to grow more and more agitated with each
step the drow took.
	But the beast did not run off, and neither did it lower its great
horn and skewer Drizzt. Soon, the drow was just a few steps away, 
feeling small beside the magnificent steed.
	Drizzt reached out a hand, fingers moving slowly, delicately. He
felt the outer strands of the unicorn’s thick and glistening coat, then
moved in another step and stroked the magnificent beast’s muscled
neck.
	The drow could hardly breathe; he wished that Guenhwyvar
were beside him, to witness such perfection of nature. He wished
that Catti-brie were here, for she would appreciate this vision as
much as he.
	He looked back to Tarathiel, the elf sitting on the stone wall and
smiling contentedly. Tarathiel’s expression turned to one of surprise, 
and Drizzt looked back to see his hand stroking the empty air.
	The unicorn was gone.

Part 2
PRAYERS UNANSWERED
ot since the day I walked out of Menzoberranzan have I been
so torn about a pending decision. I sat near the entrance of a
cave, looking out at the mountains before me, with the tunnel
leading to the Underdark at my back.
	This was the moment in which I had believed my adventure would
begin. When I had set out from Mithril Hall, I had given little thought to
the part of my journey that would take me to this cave, taking for granted
that the trip would be uneventful.
	Then I had glimpsed Ellifain, the maiden I had saved more than three
decades before, when she had been just a frightened child. I wanted to go to
her again, to speak with her and help her overcome the trauma of that ter 
rible drow raid. I wanted to run out of that cave and catch up with
T~rathiel, and ride beside the elf back to the Moonwood.
	But I could not ignore the issues that had brought me to this place.
	I had known from the outset that visiting Mon tolio’s grove, the place
of so many fond memories, would prove an emotional, even spiritual, expe 
rience. He had been my first surface friend, my mentor, the one who had
guided me to Mielikki. I can never express the joy I felt in learning that
Montolio’s grove was under the protective eye of a unicorn.
	A unicorn! I have seen a unicorn, the symbol of my goddess, the pinnacle
 of natural perfection! I might well be the first of my race to have ever
touched the soft mane and muscled neck of such a beast, the first to
encounter a unicorn in friendship. It is a rare pleasure to glimpse the signs
that a unicorn has been about, and rarer still to ever gaze at one. Few in the
Realms can say that they have ever been near a unicorn; fewer still have
ever touched one.
	I have.
	Was it a sign from my goddess? In good faith, I had to believe that it
was, that Mielikki had reached out to me in a tangible and thrilling way.
But what did it mean?
	I rarely pray. I prefer to speak to my goddess through my daily actions, 
and through my honest emotions. I need not gloss over what has occurred
with petty words, twisting them to show myself most favorably. If Mielikki
is with me, then she knows the truth, knows how I act and how Ifeel.
	I prayed that night in the cave entrance, though. I prayed for guidance, 
for something that would indicate the significance of the unicorn’s appear 
ance. The unicorn allowed me to touch it; it accepted me, and that is the
highest honor a ranger can ask. But what was the implication of that
honor?
	Was Mielikki telling me that here, on the surface, I was, and would
continue to be, accepted, and that I should not leave this place? Or was the
unicorn’s appearance to show me the goddess’s approval of my choice to
return to Menzoberranzan?
	Or was the unicorn Mielikki’s special way of saying ‘farewell?”
	That last thought haunted me all through the night. For the first time
since I had set out from Mithril Hall, I began to consider what I, Drizzt
Do’Urden, had to lose. I thought of my friends, Montolio and Wulfgar, who
had passed on from this world, and thought of those others I would likely
never see again.
	A host of questions assailed me. Would Bruenor ever get. over the loss
of his adopted son? And would Catti-brie overcome her own grief? Would
the enchanted sparkle, the sheer love of life, ever return to her blue eyes?
Would I ever again prop my weary head against Guenhwyvar’s muscled
flank?
	More than ever, I wanted to run from the cave, home to Mithril Hall, 
and stand beside my friends, to see them through their grief to guide them
and listen to them and simply embrace them.
	Again I could not ignore the issues that had brought me to this cave. I
could go back to Mithril Hall, but so could my dark kin. I did not blame
myself for Wulfgar’s death, I could not have known that the dark elves
would come. And nowl could not deny my understanding of the awful
ways and continuing hunger of Lloth. If the drow returned and extin 
guished that, cherished!, light in Catti-brie’s eyes, then Drizzt
Do’Urden would die a thousand horrible deaths.
	I prayed all that night, but found no divine guidance. In the end, as
always, I came to realize that I had to follow what I knew in my heart was
the right course, had to trust that what was in my heart was in accord with
Mielikki’s will.
	I left the fire blazing at the entrance of that cave. I needed to see its
light, to gain courage from it, for as many steps as possible as I walked into
the tunnel. As I walked into darkness.

, Drizzt Do’Urden
Chapter 7
UNFINISHED BUSINESS

	Berg’inyon Baenre hung upside down from the huge cav 
ern’s roof, securely strapped to the saddle of his lizard
mount. It had taken the young warrior some time to get
used to this position, but as commander of the Baenre
lizard riders, he spent many hours watching the city from this high
vantage point.
	A movement to the side, behind a cluster of stalactites, put
Berg’inyon on the alert. He lowered his ten foot long death lance
with one hand; the other held the lizard’s bridle while resting on the
hilt of his ready hand crossbow.
	“I am the son of House Baenre, ” he said aloud, figuring that to
be enough of a threat to defeat any possible foul play. He glanced
around, looking for support, and moved his free hand to his belt
pouch and his signal speculum, a shielded metal strip heated on one
side and used to communicate with creatures using infravision.
Dozens of other House Baenre lizard riders were about and would
come rushing to Berg’inyon’s call.
	“I am the son of House Baenre, ” he said again.
	The youngest Baenre relaxed almost immediately when his
older brother Dantrag, emerged from behind the stalactites, riding
an even larger subterranean lizard. Curious indeed did the elder
Baenre look with his ponytail hanging straight down from the top of
his upside down head.
	“As am I, ” Dantrag replied, skittering his sticky footed mount
beside Berg’inyon’s.
	“What are you doing up here?” Berg’inyon asked. “And how
did you appropriate the mount without my permission?”
	Dantrag scoffed at the question. “Appropriate?” he replied. “I
am the weapon master of House Baenre. I took the lizard, and
needed no permission from Berg’inyon.”
	The younger Baenre stared with red glowing eyes, but said
nothing more.
	“You forget who trained you, my brother, ” Dantrag remarked
quietly.
	The statement was true; Berg’inyon would never forget, could
never forget, that Dantrag had been his mentor.
	“Are you prepared to face the likes of Drizzt Do’Urden again?”
The blunt question nearly sent Berg’inyon from his mount.
	“It would seem a possibility, since we are to travel to Mithril
Hall, ” Dantrag added coolly.
	Berg’inyon blew a long and low sigh, thoroughly flustered. He
and Drizzt had been classmates at Melee Magthere, the Academy’s
school of fighters. Berg’inyon, trained by Dantrag, had gone there
fully expecting to be the finest fighter in his class. Drizzt Do’Urden, 
the renegade, the traitor, had beaten him for that honor every year.
Berg’inyon had done well at the Academy, by every standard except
Dantrag’s.
	“Are you prepared for him?” Dantrag pressed, his tone growing
more serious and angry.
	“No!” Berg’inyon glowered at his brother, sitting astride the
hanging lizard, a cocky grin on his handsome face. Dantrag had
forced the answer for a reason, Berg’inyon knew. Dantrag wanted to
make certain that Berg’inyon knew his place as a spectator if they
should happen to encounter the rogue Do’Urden together.
	And Berg’inyon knew, too, why his brother wanted the first try
at Drizzt. Drizzt had been trained by Zak’nafein, Dantrag’s princi 
pal rival, the one weapon master in Menzoberranzan whose fight 
ing skills were more highly regarded than those of Dantrag. By all
accounts, Drizzt had become at least Zak’nafein’s equal, and if
Dantrag could defeat Drizzt, then he might at last come out from
under Zak’nafein’s considerable shadow.
	“You have fought us both, ” Dantrag said slyly. “Do tell me, dear
brother, who is the better?”
	Berg’inyon couldn’t possibly answer that question. He hadn’t
fought against, or even beside, Drizzt Do’Urden for more than thirty
years. “Drizzt would cut you down, ” he said anyway, just to peeve
his upstart sibling.
	Dantrag’s hand flashed faster than Berg’inyon could follow. The
weapon master sent his wickedly sharp sword across the top strap
of Berg’inyon’s saddle, easily cutting the binding, though it was
enchanted for strength. Dantrag’s second hand came across equally
fast, slipping the bridle from the lizard’s mouthpiece as Berg’inyon
plummeted from his seat.
	The younger brother turned upright as he fell. He looked into
that area of innate magic common to all drow, and stronger in drow
nobles. Soon the descent had ceased, countered by a levitation spell
that had Berg’inyon, death lance still in hand, slowly rising back up
to meet his laughing brother.
	Matron Baenre would kill you if she knew that you had embarrassed
me so in front of the common soldiers, Berg’inyon’s hand flashed in the
silent code.
	Better to have your pride cut than your throat, Dantrag’s hands
flashed in reply, and the older Baenre walked his mount away, back
around the stalactites.
	Beside the lizard again, Berg’inyon worked to retie the top strap
and fasten together the bridle. He had claimed Drizzt to be the
better fighter, but, in considering what Dantrag had just done to
him, a perfectly aimed two hit attack before he could even begin to
retaliate, the younger Baenre doubted his claim. Drizzt Do’Urden, 
he decided, would be the one to pity if and when the two fighters
faced off.
	The thought pleased young Berg’inyon. Since his days in the
Academy, he had lived in Drizzt’s shadow, much as Dantrag had
lived in Zak’nafein’s. If Dantrag defeated Drizzt, then the Brothers
Baenre would be proven the stronger fighters, and Berg’inyon’s rep 
utation would rise simply because of his standing as Dantrag’s pro 
tegee. Berg’inyon liked the thought, liked that he stood to gain
without having to stand toe to toe against that devilish purple eyed
Do’Urden again.
	Perhaps the fight would come to an even more promising con 
clusion, Berg’inyon dared to hope. Perhaps Dantrag would kill
Drizzt, and then, weary and probably wounded, Dantrag would fall
easy prey to Berg’inyon’s sword. Berg’inyon’s reputation, as well as
his position, would rise further, for he would be the logical choice to
replace his dead brother in the coveted position as weapon master.
	The young Baenre rolled over in midair to find his place on the
repaired saddle, smiling evilly at the possibilities afforded him in
this upcoming journey to Mithril Hall.



	“Jerlys, ” the drow whispered grimly.
	“Jerlys Horlbar?” Jarlaxle asked, and the mercenary leaned
against the rough wall of the stalagmite pillar to consider the star 
tling news. Jerlys Horlbar was a matron mother, one of the two high
priestesses presiding over House Horlbar, the twelfth house of Men 
zoberranzan. Here she lay, dead, under a pile of rubble, her tentacle
rod ruined and buried beside her.
	It is good we followed him, the soldier’s flicking fingers remarked, 
more to placate the mercenary leader than to make any pertinent
revelations. Of course it was good that Jarlaxle had ordered that one
followed. He was dangerous, incredibly dangerous, but, seeing a
matron mother, a high priestess of the Spider Queen, lying dead, 
sliced by a wicked sword, the mercenary had to wonder if he, too, 
had underestimated.
	We can report it and absolve ourselves of responsibility, another of
Bregan D’aerthe’s dark band signaled.
	At first, that notion struck Jarlaxle as sound advice. The matron
mother’s body would be found, and there would be a serious
inquiry, by House Horlbar if by no one else. Guilt by association
was a very real thing in Menzoberranzan, especially for such a seri 
ous crime, and Jarlaxle wanted no part of a covert war with the
twelfth house, not now, with so many other important events brew 
ing.
	Then Jarlaxle let the circumstances lead him down another
avenue of possibility. As unfortunate as this event seemed, the mer 
cenary might still turn it to profit. There was at least one wild card
in this game that Matron Baenre played, an unknown factor that
could take the impending chaos to new levels of glory.
	Bury her once more, the mercenary signaled, deeper under the pile
this time, but not completely. I want the body found, but not for a while.
	His hard boots making not a sound, his ample jewelry quiet, the
mercenary leader started from the alley.
	Are we to rendezvous? one soldier flashed to him.
	Jarlaxle shook his head and continued on, out of the remote
alley. He knew where to find the one who had killed Jerlys Horlbar, 
and knew, too, that he could use this information against him, per 
haps to heighten his slavish loyalty to Bregan D’aerthe, or perhaps
for other reasons. Jarlaxle had to play the whole thing very carefully, 
he knew. He had to walk a narrow line between intrigue and war 
fare.
	None in the city could do that better.



	Uthegental will be prominent in the days to come.
	Dantrag Baenre cringed when the thought drifted into his mind.
He understood its source, and its subtle meaning. He and the
weapon master of House Barrison Del’Armgo, House Baenre’s chief
rival, were considered the two greatest fighters in the city.
	Matron Baenre will use his skills, the next telepathic message
warned. Dantrag drew out his surface stolen sword and looked at it.
	It flared a thin red line of light along its impossibly sharp edge, and
	the two rubies set into the eyes of its demon sculpted pommel
flared with inner life.
	Dantrag’s hand clasped the pommel and warmed as Khazid’hea, 
Cutter, continued its communication. He is strong and will fare well in
the raids on Mithril Hall. He lusts for the blood of the young Do’Urden, 
the legacy of Zak’nafein, as greatly as you do, perhaps even more.
	Dantrag sneered at that last remark, thrown in only because
Khazid’hea wanted him on the edge of anger. The sword considered
Dantrag its partner, not its master, and knew that it could better
manipulate Dantrag if he was angry.
	After many decades wielding Khazid’hea, Dantrag, too, knew
all of this, and he forced himself to keep calm.
	“None desire Drizzt Do’Urden’s death more than I, ” Dantrag
assured the doubting sword. “And Matron Baenre will see to it that
I, not Uthegental, have the opportunity to slay the renegade. Matron
Baenre would not want the honors that would undoubtedly accom 
pany such a feat to be granted to a warrior of the second house.”
	The sword’s red line flared again in intensity and reflected in
Dantrag’s amber eyes. Kill Uthegental, and her task will become easier, 
Khazid’hea reasoned.
	Dantrag laughed aloud at the notion, and Khazid’hea’s fiendish
eyes flared again. “Kill him?” Dantrag echoed. “Kill one that Matron
Baenre has deemed important for the mission ahead? She would
flay the skin from my bones!”
But you could kill him?
	Dantrag laughed again, for the question was simply to mock
him, to urge him on to the fight that Khazid’hea had desired for so
very long. The sword was proud, at least as proud as either Dantrag
or Uthegental, and it wanted desperately to be in the hands of the
indisputably finest weapon master of Menzoberranzan, whichever
of the two that might be.
	“You must pray that I could, ” Dantrag replied, turning the
tables on the impetuous sword. “Uthegental favors his trident, and
no sword. If he proved the victor, then Khazid’hea might end up in
the scabbard of a lesser fighter.”
He would wield me.
	Dantrag slid the sword away, thinking the preposterous claim
not even worth answering. Also tired of this useless banter, 
Khazid’hea went silent, brooding.
	The sword had opened some concerns for Dantrag. He knew
the importance of this upcoming assault. If he could strike down the
young Do’Urden, then all glory would be his, but if Uthegental got
there first, then Dantrag would be considered second best in the city, 
a rank he could never shake unless he found and killed Uthegental.
His mother would not be pleased by such events, Dantrag knew.
Dantrag’s life had been miserable when Zak’nafein Do’Urden had
been alive, with Matron Baenre constantly urging him to find and
slay the legendary weapon master.
	This time, Matron Baenre probably wouldn’t even allow him
that option. With Berg’inyon coming into excellence as a fighter, 
Matron Baenre might simply sacrifice Dantrag and turn the coveted
position of weapon master over to her younger son. If she could
claim that the move was made because Berg’inyon was the better
fighter, that would again spread doubt among the populace as to
which house had the finest weapon master.
	The solution was simple: Dantrag had to get Drizzt.

Chapter 8
OUT OF PLACE

	He moved without a whisper along the lightless tunnels, 
his eyes glowing lavender, seeking changes in the heat
patterns along the floor and walls that would indicate
bends, or enemies, in the tunnel. He seemed at home, a
creature of the Underdark, moving with typically quiet grace and
cautious posture.
	Drizzt did not feel at home, though. Already he was deeper
than the lowest tunnels of Mithril Hall, and the stagnant air pressed
in on him. He had spent nearly two decades on the surface, learning
and living by the rules that governed the outer world. Those rules
were as different to Underdark precepts as a forest wildflower was
to a deep cavern fungus. A human, a goblin, even an alert surface
elf, would have taken no note of Drizzt’s silent passage, though he
might cross just a few feet away, but Drizzt felt clumsy and loud.
	The drow ranger cringed with every step, fearing that echoes
were resounding along the blank stone walls hundreds of yards
away. This was the Underdark, a place negotiated less by sight than
by hearing and the sense of smell.
	Drizzt had spent nearly two thirds of his life in the Underdark, 
and a good portion of the last twenty years underground in the cav 
erns of Clan Battlehammer. He no longer considered himself a crea 
ture of the Underdark, though. He had left his heart behind on a
mountainside, watching the stars and the moon, the sunrise and the
sunset.
	This was the land of starless nights, no, not nights, just a
single, unending starless night, Drizzt decided, of stagnant air, and
leering stalactites.
	The tunnel’s width varied greatly, sometimes as narrow as the
breadth of Drizzt’s shoulders, sometimes wide enough for a dozen
men to walk abreast. The floor sloped slightly, taking Drizzt even
deeper, but the ceiling paralleled it well, remaining fairly consistent
at about twice the height of the five and a half foot drow. For a long
time, Drizzt detected no side caverns or corridors, and he was glad
of that, for he didn’t want to be forced into any direction decisions
yet, and in this simple setup, any potential enemies would have to
come at him from straight ahead.
	Drizzt honestly believed that he was not prepared for any sur 
prises, not yet. Even his infravision pained him. His head throbbed
as he tried to sort out and interpret the varying heat patterns. In his
younger years, Drizzt had gone for weeks, even months, with his
eyes tuned exclusively to the infrared spectrum, looking for heat
instead of reflected light. But now, with his eyes so used to the sun
above and the torches lining the corridors of Mithril Hall, he found
the infravision jarring.
	Finally, he drew out Twinkle, and the enchanted scimitar
glowed with a soft bluish light. Drizzt rested back against the wall
and let his eyes revert to the regular spectrum, then used the sword
as a guiding light. Soon after, he came to a six way intersection, two
crossing horizontal corridors intersected by a vertical shaft.
	Drizzt tucked Twinkle away and looked above, up the shaft. He
saw no heat sources, but was little comforted. Many of the Under 
dark’s predators could mask their body temperatures, like a surface
tiger used its stripes to crawl through thick strands of high grass.
Dreaded hook horrors, for example, had developed an exoskeleton;
the bony plates shielded the creature’s body heat so that they
appeared as unremarkable rocks to heat sensing eyes. And many of
the Underdark’s monsters were reptilian, cold blooded, and hard to
see.
	Drizzt sniffed the stagnant air several times, then he stood still
and closed his eyes, letting his ears provide all the external input.
He heard nothing, save the beating of his own heart, so he checked
his gear to ensure that all was secure and started to climb down the
shaft, taking care amid the dangerously loose rubble.
	He nearly made it silently down the sixty feet to the lower corri 
dor, but a single stone skidded down before him, striking the corri 
dor’s floor with a sharp crack at almost the same instant that
Drizzt’s soft boots quietly came down from the wall.
	Drizzt froze in place, listening to the sound as it echoed from
wall to wall. As a drow patrol leader, Drizzt had once been able to
follow echoes perfectly, almost instinctively discerning which walls
were rebounding the sound, and from which direction. Now, 
though, he had difficulty sorting through the echo’s individual
sounds. Again he felt out of place, overmatched by the brooding
darkness. And again he felt vulnerable, for many denizens of the
dark ways could indeed follow an echo trail, and this particular one
led directly to Drizzt.
	He swiftly traversed a virtual maze of crisscrossing corridors, 
some veering sharply and descending to pass beneath others, or
climbing along natural stairs to new levels of winding ways.
	Drizzt sorely missed Guenhwyvar. The panther could sort
through any maze.
	He thought of the cat again a short time later, when he came
around a bend and stumbled upon a fresh kill. It was some type of
subterranean lizard, too mutilated for Drizzt to figure out exactly
what. Its tail was gone, as was its lower jaw, and its belly had been
gashed open, its innards devoured. Drizzt found long tears in the
skin, as though it had been raked by claws, and long and thin
bruises, like those made by a whip. Beyond a pooi of blood a few
feet from the corpse, the drow found a single track, a paw print, in a
shape and size very similar to one Guenhwyvar might make.
	But Drizzt’s cat was hundreds of miles away, and this kill, by
the ranger’s estimation, was barely an hour old. Creatures of the
Underdark did not roam as did creatures of the surface; the danger 
ous predator was likely not far away.



	Bruenor Battlehammer stormed along the passageway, his grief
stolen, for the moment, by undeniably mounting rage. Thibbledorf
Pwent bounced along beside the king, his mouth flapping one ques 
tion after another and his armor squealing annoyingly with every
movement.
	Bruenor skidded to a stop and turned on the battlerager, put his
angry scar and angry scowl in line with Pwent’s bushy bearded
face. Why don’t ye get yerself a bath!” Bruenor roared.
	Pwent fell back and began to choke on the command. By his
estimation, a dwarf king ordering a subject to go take a bath was
roughly the equivalent of a human king telling his knights to go out
and kill babies. There were some lines that a ruler simply did not
cross.
	“Bah!” Bruenor snorted. “Good enough for ye, then. But go and
grease that damned armor! How’s a king to think with yer squeakin’
and squealin’?”
	Pwent’s head bobbed his agreement with the compromise, and
he bounded away, almost afraid to stay, afraid that the tyrant King
Bruenor would again demand the bath.
	Bruenor just wanted the battlerager away from him, he didn’t
really care how he accomplished that task. It had been a difficult
afternoon. The dwarf had just met with Berkthgar the Bold, an emis 
sary from Settlestone, and had learned that Catti-brie had never
arrived in the barbarian settlement, even though she had been out
of Mithril Hall for nearly a week.
	Bruenor ‘s mind raced over the events of his last meeting with
his daughter. He recalled images of the young woman, tried to
scrutinize them and remember every word she had said for some
clue as to what might be happening. But Bruenor had been too
absorbed on that occasion. If Catti-brie had hinted at anything other
than her intentions to go to Settlestone, the dwarf had simply
missed ut.
	His first thoughts, when talking with Berkthgar, were that his
daughter had met some trouble on the mountainside. He had
almost called out a dwarven contingent to scour the area, but, on an
impulse, had paused long enough to ask the emissary about the
cairn being erected for Wulfgar.
	“What cairn?” Berkthgar had replied.
	Bruenor knew then that he had been deceived, and if Catti-brie
had not been alone in that deception, then Bruenor could easily
guess the identity of her coconspirator.
	He nearly took the wooden, iron bound door of Buster Bracer, a
highly regarded armorer, off its hinges as he burst in, catching the
blue bearded dwarf and his halfling subject by surprise. Regis stood
atop a small platform, being measured so that his armor could be let
out to fit his widening girth.
	Bruenor bounded up beside the pedestal (and Buster was wise
enough to fall back from it), grabbed the halfling by the front of his
tunic, and hoisted him into the air with one arm.
	“Where’s me girl?” the dwarf roared.
	“Settle.. .“ Regis started to lie, but Bruenor began shaking him
violently, whipping him back and forth through the air like some
rag doll.
	“Where’s me girl?” the dwarf said again, more quietly, his
words a threatening snarl. “And don’t ye play games with me, 
Rumblebelly.”
	Regis was getting more than a little tired of being assaulted by
his supposed friends. The quick thinking halfling immediately con 
cocted a ruse about Catti-brie having run off to Silverymoon in
search of Drizzt. It wouldn’t be a complete lie, after all.
	Looking at Bruenor ‘s scarred face, twisted in rage, but so obvi 
ously filled with pain, the halfling could not bring himself to fib.
	“Put me down, ” he said quietly, and apparently Bruenor under 
stood the halfling’s empathy, for the dwarf gently lowered Regis to
the ground.
	Regis brushed his tunic straight, then waggled a fist before the
dwarf king. “How dare you?” he roared.
	Bruenor went back on his heels at the unexpected and unchar 
acteristic outburst, but the halfling did.not relent.
	“First Drizzt comes to me and forces me to hold a secret, ” Regis
expounded, “then Catti-brie comes in and pushes me around until I
tell her. Now you... . What fine friends I have surrounded myself
with!”
	The stinging words calmed the volatile dwarf, but only a little.
What secret might Regis be hinting at?
	Thibbledorf Pwent bounded into the room then, his armor
squeaking no less, though his face, beard, and hands were certainly
smeared with grease. He stopped beside Bruenor, surveying the
unexpected situation for just a moment.
	Pwent rubbed his hands eagerly in front of him, then ran them
down the front of his cruelly ridged armor. “Should I hug him?” he
asked his king hopefully.
	Bruenor slapped a hand out to hold the eager battlerager at bay.
“Where’s me girl?” the dwarf king asked a third time, this time
quietly and calmly, as though he was asking a friend.
	Regis firmed his jaw, then nodded and began. He told Bruenor
everything, even his role in aiding Catti-brie, in handing her the
assassin’s dagger and the magical mask.
	Bruenor ‘s face began to twist in rage again, but Regis stood tall
(relatively speaking) and dispelled the rising ire.
	“Am I to trust in Catti-brie any less than you would?” Regis
asked simply, reminding the dwarf that his human daughter was no
child, and no novice to the perils of the road.
	Bruenor didn’t know how to take it all. A small part of him
wanted to throttle Regis, but he understood that he would simply
be playing out his frustration, and that the halfling was really not to
blame. Where else could he turn, though? Both Drizzt and Catti-brie
were long gone, well on their way, and Bruenor had no idea of how
he could get to them!
	Neither did the scarred dwarf, at that moment, have any
strength to try. He dropped his gaze to the stone floor, his anger
played out and his grief returned, and, without another word, he
walked from the room. He had to think, and for the sake of his
dearest friend and his beloved daughter, he had to think fast.
	Pwent looked to Regis and Buster for answers, but they simply
shook their heads.



	A slight shuffle, the padded footsteps of a hunting cat, perhaps, 
was all that Drizzt could discern. The drow ranger stood perfectly
still, all his senses attuned to his surroundings. If it was the cat, 
Drizzt knew that it was close enough to have caught his scent, that it
undoubtedly knew that something had wandered into its territory~
	Drizzt spent a moment scrutinizing the area. The tunnel contin 
ued haphazardly, sometimes wide, sometimes narrow, and this
entire section was broken and uneven, the floor full of bumps and
holes and the walls lined by natural alcoves and deep nooks. The
ceiling, too, was no longer constant, sometimes low and sometimes
high. Drizzt could see the varied gradations of heat on the high
walls ahead and knew that those walls were lined by ledges in
many places.
	A great cat could jump up there, watching its intended prey
from above.
	The thought was not a settling one, but Drizzt had to press on.
To backtrack, he would have to go all the way to the chute and climb
to a higher level, then wander about in the hopes that he would find
another way down. Drizzt didn’t have time to spare; neither did his
friends.
	He put his back against the wall as he continued, stalking in a
crouch, one scimitar drawn and the other, Twinkle, ready in its
sheath. Drizzt did not want the magical blade’s glow to further
reveal his position, though he knew that hunting cats in the Under 
dark needed no light.
	He lightly stepped across the mouth of one wide and shallow
alcove, then came to the edge of a second, narrower and deeper.
When he was satisfied that this one, too, was unoccupied, he turned
back for a general scan of the area.
	Shining green eyes, cat eyes, stared back at him from the ledge
on the opposite wall.
	Out came Twinkle, flaring an angry blue, bathing the area in
light. Drizzt, his eyes shifting back from the infrared spectrum, saw
the great, dark silhouette as the monster leaped, and he deftly dove
out of harm’s way. The cat touched down lightly, with all six legs!, 
and it pivoted about, showing white teeth and sinister eyes.
	It was pantherlike, its fur so black as to shimmer a deep blue, 
and it was nearly as large as Guenhwyvar. Drizzt didn’t know what
to think. If this had been a normal panther, he would have tried to
calm it, tried to show it that he was no enemy and that he would go
right past its lair. But this cat, this monster, had six legs! And from
its shoulders protruded long, whiplike appendages, waving menacingly and tipped with bony ridges.
	Snarling, the beast padded in, ears tight against its head, formi 
dable fangs bared. Drizzt crouched low, scimitars straight out in
front, feet perfectly balanced so that he could dodge aside.
	The beast stopped its stalk. Drizzt watched carefully as its
middle set of legs and its hind legs tamped down.
	It came fast; Drizzt started left, but the beast skidded to a stop, 
and Drizzt did likewise, lurching ahead to cut with one blade in a
straight thrust. Right between the panther’s eyes went the scimitar, 
perfectly aligned.
	It hit nothing but air, and Drizzt stumbled forward. He instinc 
tively dove to the stone and rolled right as one tentacle whipped just
above his head and the other scored a slight hit on his hip. Huge
paws raked and swatted all about him, but he worked his scimitars
wildly, somehow keeping them at bay. He came up running, quickly
putting a few feet between himself and the dangerous cat.
	The drow settled back into his defensive crouch, less confident
now. The beast was smart, Drizzt would never have expected such
a feint from an animal. Worse, the drow could not understand how
he had missed. His blade’s thrust had been true. Even the incredible
agility of a cat could not have gotten the beast out of the way so
quickly.
	A tentacle came at him from the right, and he threw a scimitar
out that way not just to parry, but hoping to sever the thing.
	He missed, then barely managed, past his surprise, to twirl to
the left, taking another hit on the hip, this one painful.
	The beast rushed forward, one paw flying out in front to hook
the spinning drow. Drizzt braced, Twinkle ready to block, but the
paw caught him fully a foot below the scimitar’s blocking angle.
	Again Drizzt’s ability to react saved him, for instead of fighting
the angle of the in turned paw (which would have ripped large lines
in his body), he dove with it, down to the stone, scrambling and
kicking his way past the panther’s snapping maw. He felt like a
mouse run~ring back under a house cat, and, worse, this cat had two
sets of legs left to cross!
	Drizzt elbowed and batted, jabbed up, and scored a solid hit. He
couldn’t see in the sudden, wild flurry, and only when he came out
the panther’s back side did he realize that his blindness was his sav 
ing grace. He came up into a running step, then leaped into a head 
long roll just ahead of twin snapping tentacles.
	He hadn’t been able to see, and he had scored his only hit.
	The panther came around again, snarling in rage, its green eyes
boring like lamplights into the drow.
	Drizzt spat at those eyes, a calculated move, for though his aim
seemed true and the beast made no move to dodge, the spittle hit
only the stone floor. The cat was not where it appeared to be.
	Drizzt tried to remember his training in Menzoberranzan’s
Academy He had heard of such beasts once, but they were very rare
and hadn’t been a source of any major lessons.
	In came the cat. Drizzt leaped forward, inside the snapping
reach of those painful tentacles. He guessed, aiming his attack a
couple of feet to the right of where he perceived the beast.
	But the cat was left, and as his scimitar swished harmlessly
through the air, Drizzt knew he was in trouble. He leaped straight
up, felt a claw slash at his foot, the same foot that had been
wounded in his fight with Artemis Entreri on the ledge outside
Mithril Hall. Down sliced Twinkle, the magnificent blade gashing
the front claw, forcing the cat to retreat. Drizzt landed half entwined
with the beast, felt the hot breath of its drooling maw about his fore 
arm and punched out, twisting his wrist so that his weapon’s cross 
piece prevented the monster from tearing his hand off.
	He closed his eyes, they would only confuse him, and bashed
down with Twinkle’s hilt, clubbing the monster’s head. Then he
jerked free and ran off. The bony end of a tentacle flew out behind
him, caught up to his back, and he threw himself into a headlong
roll, absorbing some of the sting.
	Up again, Drizzt ran on in full flight. He came to the wide and
shallow alcove and spun in, the monster right behind.
	Drizzt reached within himself, into his innate magical abilities, 
and brought forth a globe of impenetrable darkness. Twinkle’s light
disappeared, as did the monster’s shining eyes.
	Drizzt circled two steps and came forward, not wanting the
beast to escape the darkened area. He felt the swish of a tentacle, a
near hit, then sensed it coming back again the other way The drow
smiled in satisfaction as his scimitar slashed out to meet it, cutting
right through.
	The beast’s pained roar guided Drizzt back in. He couldn’t get
caught in too tight, he knew, but, with his scimitars, he had an
advantage of reach. With Twinkle up to fend against the remaining
tentacle, he jabbed the other blade repeatedly, scoring a few minor
hits.
	The enraged cat leaped, but Drizzt sensed it and fell flat to the
floor, rolling to his back and thrusting both his blades straight up, 
scoring a serious double hit on the monster’s belly
	The cat came down hard, skidding heavily into the wall, and, 
before it could recover, Drizzt was upon it. A scimitar bashed
against its skull, creasing its head. The cat whipped about and
sprang forward, paws extended, maw opened wide.
	Twinkle was waiting. The scimitar’s tip caught the beast on the
chin and slid down under the maw to dig at its rushing neck. A paw
batted the blade, nearly tearing it free from the drow’s extended
hand, but Drizzt knew that he had to hang on, for all his life. There
came a savage flurry, but the drow, backpedaling, managed to keep
the beast at bay.
	Out of the darkness the two came, the beast pressing on. Drizzt
closed his eyes. He sensed that the remaining tentacle would snap at
him, and he reversed direction, suddenly throwing all his weight
behind Twinkle. The tentacle wrapped his back; he got his opposite
elbow up just in time to prevent its end from coming right around
and slamming his face.
	Twinkle was in the monster halfway to the hilt. A wheezing and
gurgling sound came from the beast’s throat, but heavy paws bat 
tered at Drizzt’s sides, shredding pieces of his cloak and scratching
the fine mithril armor. The cat tried to turn its impaled neck to the
side to bite Drizzt’s arm.
	Drizzt free hand went to work, furiously pumping up and
down, bashing his scimitar repeatedly against the cat’s head.
	He felt the claws grasp and hold him, biting maw just an inch
from his belly One claw slipped through a chain link in the metal
coat, slightly puncturing the drow’s side.
	The scimitar bashed again and again.
	Down they tumbled in a heap. Drizzt, on his side and staring
into wicked eyes, thought he was doomed and tried to squirm free.
But the cat’s grip loosened, and Drizzt realized that the beast was
dead. He finally wriggled from the hold and looked down at the
slain creature, its green eyes shining even in death.



	“Don’t ye go in there, ” one of the two guards outside Bruenor’s
throne room said to Regis as he boldly approached the door. The
halfling considered them carefully, he never remembered seeing a
dwarf so pale!
	The door banged open, and a contingent of dwarves, fully
armed and armored, burst out, falling all over each other as they ran
off down the stone corridor. Behind them came a verbal tirade, a
stream of curses from their king.
	One of the guards started to close the door, but Regis hopped up
and pushed his way in.
	Bruenor paced about his throne, punching the great chair when 
ever he passed close enough. General Dagna, Mithril Hall’s military
leader, sat in his appointed chair, looking rather glum, and Thibble 
dorf Pwent hopped about gleefully in Bruenor ‘s shadow, cautiously
dodging aside whenever Bruenor spun about.
	“Stupid priests!” Bruenor growled.
	“With Cobble dead, there are none powerful enough, ” Dagna
tried to intervene, but Bruenor wasn’t listening.
	“Stupid priests!” the dwarf king said more forcefully
	“Yeah!” Pwent readily agreed.
	“Me king, ye’ve set two patrols off to Silverymoon, and another
north o’ the city, ” Dagna tried to reason. “And ye’ve got half me sol 
diers walking the tunnels below.”
	“And I’ll be sending the other half if them that’s there don’t
show me the way!” Bruenor roared.
	Regis, still standing unnoticed by the door, was beginning to
catch on, and he wasn’t displeased by what he was seeing. Brue 
nor, and it seemed like the old Bruenor once more!, was moving
heaven and earth to find Drizzt and Catti-brie. The old dwarf had
stoked his inner fires!
	“But there are a thousand separate tunnels down there, ” Dagna
argued. “And some may take a week to explore before we learn that
they’re dead ends.”
	“Then send down a thousand dwarves!” Bruenor growled at
him. He stalked past the chair again, then skidded to a stop, and
Pwent bounced into his back, as he regarded the halfling.
	“What’re ye looking at?” Bruenor demanded when he noticed
Regis’s wide eyed stare.
	Regis would have liked to say, “At my oldest friend, ” but he
merely shrugged instead. For an instant, he caught a flash of anger
in the dwarf’s one blue gray eye, and he thought that Bruenor was
leaning toward him, perhaps fighting an inner urge to rush over
and throttle him. But the dwarf calmed and slid into his throne.
	Regis cautiously approached, studying Bruenor and taking little
heed of pragmatic Dagna’s claims that there was no way to catch up
with the two wayfaring friends. Regis heard enough to figure that
Dagna wasn’t too worried for Drizzt and Catti-brie, and that didn’t
surprise him much, since the crusty dwarf wasn’t overly fond of
anyone who wasn’t a dwarf.
	“If we had the damned cat, ” Bruenor began, and again came
that flash of anger as he regarded the halfling. Regis put his hands
behind his back and bowed his head.
	“Or me damned locket!” Bruenor roared. “Where in the Nine
Hells did I put me damned locket?”
	Regis winced at every roaring outburst, but Bruenor ‘s anger did
not change his feelings that he had done the right thing in assisting
Catti-brie, and in sending Guenhwyvar along with her.
	And, though he half expected Bruenor to punch him in the face
at any moment, it did not change the halfling’s feelings that he was
glad to see Bruenor full of life again.


Chapter 9
CAGED

	Plodding along a slow and rocky trail, they had to walk
the horses more than ride them. Every passing inch tor 
mented Catti-brie. She had seen the light of a campfire
the previous night and knew in her heart that it had
been Drizzt. She had gone straight to her horse, meaning to saddle
up and head out, using the light as a beacon to the drow, but Fret
had stopped her, explaining that the magical horseshoes that their
mounts wore did not protect the beasts from exhaustion. He
reminded her, too, of the dangers she would likely encounter in the
mountains at night.
	Catti-brie had gone back to her own fire then, thoroughly miser 
able. She considered calling for Guenhwyvar and sending the pan 
ther out for Drizzt, but shook the notion away The campfire was
just a dot somewhere on the higher trails, many miles away, and she
had no way of knowing, rationally, that it was indeed Drizzt.
	Now, though, crossing along the higher trails, making their
steady but painfully slow way in that very same direction, Catti-brie
feared that she had erred. She watched Fret, scratching his white
beard, looking this way and that at the unremarkable landscape, 
and wished they had that campfire to guide them.
	“We will get there!” the tidy dwarf often said to her, looking
back into her disgusted expression.
	Morning turned into afternoon; long shadows drifted across the
landscape.
	“We must make camp, ” Fret announced as twilight descended.
	“We’re going on, ” Catti-brie argued. “If that was Drizzt’s fire, 
then he’s a day up on us already, no matter for yer magical horse 
shoes!”
	“I cannot hope to find the cave in the darkness!” the dwarf
retorted. “We could find a giant, or a troll, perhaps, and I’m sure
that many wolves will be about, but a cave?” Looking into Catti 
brie’s deepening scowl, Fret began to ponder the wisdom of his sar 
casm.
	“Oh, all right!” the tidy dwarf cried. “We will keep looking until
the night is full.”
	They pressed on, until Catti-brie could hardly see her horse
walking beside her and Fret’s pony nearly stumbled over the edge
of a ravine. Finally, even stubborn Catti-brie had to relent and agree
to make camp.
	After they had settled in, she went and found a tree, a tall pine, 
and climbed nearly to its top to keep her vigil. If the light of a camp 
fire came up, the young woman determined, she would set out, or
would at least send the panther.
	There were no campfires that night.
	As soon as the dawn’s light permitted, the two set off again.
Barely an hour out, Fret clapped his clean hands together excitedly, 
thinking that he had found a familiar trail. “We are not far, ” he
promised.
	Up and down went the trail, into rocky, tree filled valleys, and
up again across bare, windswept stone. Fret tethered his pony to a
tree branch and led the way up the steep side of one mound, telling
Catti-brie that they had found the place, only to discover, two hours
of climbing later, that they had scaled the wrong mountain.
	In midafternoon they discovered that Fret’s earlier promise that
they were “not far, ” was accurate. When he had made that state 
ment, the cave the dwarf sought was no more than half a mile from
their location. But finding a specific cave in mountain territory is no
easy task, even for a dwarf, and Fret had been to the place only
once, nearly twenty years before.
	He found it, finally, as the shadows again grew long in the
mountains. Catti-brie shook her head as she examined the entrance
and the fire pit that had been used two nights before. The embers
had been tended with great care, such as a ranger might do.
	“He was here, ” the young woman said to the dwarf, “two
nights ago.” Catti-brie rose from the fire pit and brushed her thick
auburn locks back from her face, eyeing the dwarf as though he was
to blame. She looked out from the cave, back across the mountains, 
to where they had been, to the location from which they had seen
this very fire.
	“We could not have gotten here that night, ” the dwarf answered.
“You could have run off, or ridden off, into the darkness with all
speed, and, ”
	“The firelight would’ve shown us through, ” Catti-brie inter 
rupted.
	“For how long?” the dwarf demanded. “We found one vantage
point, one hole through the towering peaks. As soon as we went
into a ravine, or crossed close to the side of a mountain, the light
would have been lost to us. Then where would we be, stubborn
daughter of Bruenor?”
	Again Catti-brie’s scowl stopped the dwarf short. He sighed
profoundly and threw up his hands.
	He was right, Catti-brie knew. While they had gone no more
than a few miles deeper into the mountains since that night, the
trails had been treacherous, climbing and descending, winding
snakelike around the many rocky peaks. She and the dwarf had
walked a score of miles, at least, to get to this point, and even if she
had summoned Guenhwyvar, there was no way the panther could
have caught up to Drizzt.
	That logic did little to quell the frustration boiling within Catti 
brie. She had vowed to follow Drizzt, to find him and bring him
home, but now, standing at the edge of a forlorn cave in a wild
place, she faced the entrance to the Underdark.
	“We will go back to Lady Alustriel, ” Fret said to her. “Perhaps
she has some allies, she has so many of those!, who will be better
able to locate the drow.”
	“What’re ye saying?” Catti-brie wanted to know.
	“It was a valiant chase, ” Fret replied. “Your father will be proud
of your effort, but, ”
	Catti-brie rushed up to the dwarf, pushed him aside, and stum 
bled down toward the back of the cave, toward the blackness of a
descending tunnel entrance. She stubbed her toe hard against a jag
in the floor, but refused to cry out, even to grunt, not wanting Fret to
think her ridiculous. In fumbling with her pack, though, trying to
get to her tinderbox, lantern, and oil, Catti-brie thought herself so
just the same.
	“Do you know that she likes you?” Fret asked casually
	The question stopped the young woman. She looked back to
regard the dwarf, who was just a short, dark silhouette before the
lighter gray of the outside night.
	“Alustriel, I mean, ” Fret clarified.
	Catti-brie had no answer. She hadn’t felt comfortable around
the magnificent Lady of Silverymoon, far from it. Intentionally or
not, Alustriel had made her feel little, perfectly insignificant.
	“She does, ” Fret insisted. “She likes you and admires you.”
	“In an orc’s thoughts, ” Catti-brie huffed. She thought she was
being mocked.
	“You remind her of her sister, ” Fret went on, without missing a
beat, “Dove Falconhand, a spirited woman if ever there was one.”
	Catti-brie did not reply this time. She had heard many tales of
Alustriel’s sister, a legendary ranger, and had indeed fancied herself
somewhat like Dove. Suddenly the dwarf’s claims did not seem so
outrageous.
	“Alas for Alustriel, ” Fret remarked. “She wishes that she could
be more like you.”
	“In an orc’s thoughts!” Catti-brie blurted, unable to stop herself.
The notion that Alustriel, the fabulous Lady of Silverymoon, could
be the least bit jealous of Catti-brie seemed absurd.
	“In a human’s thoughts, I say!” Fret replied. “What is it about
your race that none of you can seem to properly weigh your own
value? Every human seems to think more of herself than she should, 
or less of herself than is sensible! Alustriel likes you, I say, even
admires you. If she did not, if she thought you and your plans were
silly, then why would she go to this trouble? Why would she send
me, a valuable sage, along with you? And why, daughter of Bruenor
Battlehammer, would she give you this?”
	He lifted one hand, holding something delicate that Catti-brie
could not make out. She paused a moment to digest what he had
said, then walked back over to him.
	The dwarf held a fine silver chain, a circlet headdress, with a
gemstone set into it.
	“It is beautiful, ” Catti-brie admitted, studying the pale green
gem, a line of black running  through its center.
	“More than beautiful, ” Fret said, and he motioned for Catti-brie
to put it on.
	She clasped it in place, the gem set against the middle of her
forehead, and then she nearly swooned, for the images around her
suddenly blurred and wavered. She could see the dwarf, not just
his silhouette, but actually Fret’s features! She glanced about in dis 
belief, focusing on the back of the cave. It seemed as if it was bathed
in starlight, not brightly, but Catti-brie could make out the jags and
the nooks clearly enough.
	Catti-brie could not see it, of course, but the thin black line
along the middle of the gemstone had widened like a pupil.
	“Walking into the Underdark under a blazing torch is not the
wisest move, ” Fret remarked. “A single candle would mark you as
out of place and would leave you vulnerable. And how much oil
could you carry in any case? Your lantern would be useless to you
before the first day had ended. The Cat’s Eye eliminates the need, 
you see.”
	“Cat’s eye?”
	“Cat’s Eye agate, ” Fret explained, pointing to the gemstone.
“Alustriel did the enchanting herself. Normally a gem ensorcelled
such would show you only shades of gray, but the lady does favor
starlight. Few in the Realms could claim the honor of receiving such
a gift.”
	Catti-brie nodded and didn’t know how to reply Pangs of guilt
accompanied her scrutiny of her feelings for the Lady of Silvery 
moon, and she thought herself ridiculous for ever doubting, and
for ever allowing jealousy to cloud her judgment.
	“I was instructed to try to dissuade you from the dangerous
course, ” the dwarf went on, “but Alustriel knew that I would fail.
You are indeed so like Dove, headstrong and stubborn, and feeling
positively immortal. She knew that you would go, even into the
Underdark, ” Fret said. “And, although Alustriel fears for you, she
knows that nothing could or should stop you.”
	The dwarf’s tone was neither sarcastic nor demeaning, and
again Catti-brie was caught off guard, unprepared for the words.
	“Will you stay the night in the cave?” Fret asked. “I could start a
fire.”
	Catti-brie shook her head. Drizzt was already too far ahead of
her.
	“Of course, ” the tidy dwarf muttered quietly
	Catti-brie didn’t hear him; she was already walking toward the
back of the cave, toward the tunnel. She paused and summoned
Guenhwyvar, realizing that she would need the panther’s support
to get going. As the cat materialized, Catti-brie looked back to the
cave entrance to tell the dwarf to relay her thanks to Alustriel, but
Fret was already gone.
	“Come along, Guen, ” the young woman said, a strained smile
on her face. “We have to find Drizzt.” The panther poked about the
tunnel entrance for a bit, then started down, apparently on the trail.
	Catti-brie paused a long moment, staring back to the cave
entrance and the starry sky beyond. She wondered if she would
ever see those stars again.

Chapter 10
OLD FRIENDS

	He crossed through narrow tunnels and halls that spread
beyond vision to either side and above. He trotted
along muddy flats and bare stone, without splashes, 
without sound. Every step Drizzt Do’Urden took in the
deeper tunnels of the Underdark jogged his memory a little bit
more, brought him back to the days when he had survived the
wilds, when he had been the hunter.
	He had to find that inner being, that primal savage within him, 
that heard the call of his instincts so very well. There was no time for
rational calculations in the wilds of the Underdark; there was only
time to act.
	Drizzt hated the prospect of giving in to that savage element, 
hated this whole journey, but he had to go on, knowing that if he
failed, if he was killed in the wilds before he ever got to Menzober 
ranzan, his quest would prove detrimental to his friends. Then he
would be gone, but the dark elves would not know it and would
still go after Mithril Hall. For the sake of Bruenor, Regis, and dear
Catti-brie, Drizzt had to go on, and had to become the primal hunter
once more.
	He climbed to the ceiling of a high corridor for his first break
and slept lightly, hanging upside down, his legs wedged up to the
knees in a narrow crack, his fingers hooked under his belt, near his
scimitars.
	An echo down a distant tunnel woke him after only an hour of
dozing. It had been a slight sound, a step into sucking mud, per 
haps, but Drizzt held perfectly still, sensing the disturbance in the
still air, hearing minute residual echoes and correctly guessing the
direction.
	He pulled out his legs and rolled, dropping the fifteen feet to the
ground, the toes of his soft boots touching first to absorb the impact
and bring him down without a whisper. He ran on, taking care to
keep far from those echoes, desiring no more conflicts before he got
to the drow city
	He grew more confident with every step. His instincts were
returning, along with his memories of that time he spent alone in
the wilds of the Underdark. He came to another muddy area, where
the air was warm, and the sound of hot, aerated water hissed and
gurgled. Wet, gleaming stalagmite and stalactites, glowing warm to
the drow’s heat seeing eyes, dotted the area, breaking this single
tunnel into a virtual maze.
	Drizzt knew this place, remembered it from the journey he had
taken to the surface. That fact brought both relief and trepidation to
the drow. He was glad that he was on course, but he could not deny
his fear that he was on course. He let the water sound guide him
along, knowing that he would find the proper tunnels just beyond
the hot springs.
	The air grew steadily warmer, soon uncomfortably so, but Drizzt
kept his cloak on and drawn tight, not wanting to get caught up with
anything more than a scimitar in his hands in this dangerous area.
	And the drow knew that this was indeed a dangerous area. Any
number of monsters might be crouched behind one of the ever 
present mounds, and it took great effort for Drizzt to move silently
through the thickening mud. If he kept his foot in one position for
arty length of time, the clinging stuff ran up around his boot, and
subsequently lifting the gummed foot would inevitably result in a
sucking sound. On one such occasion, Drizzt paused as he slowly
hoisted his foot, trying todiscern the echo patterns. It took only a
moment for him to understand that the responding sounds he heard
were made by more feet than his own.
	Drizzt quickly surveyed the area and considered the air temper 
ature and the intensity of the stalagmites’ glow. The footsteps grew
louder, and Drizzt realized that a band of more than a few
approached. He scanned every side tunnel, quickly coming to the
conclusion that this band carried no light source.
	Drizzt moved under one narrow spike of a stalactite, its tip
hanging no more than four feet from the floor. He tucked his legs
under him and knelt beneath the thing. He positioned his cloak
about his knees in a conical fashion, taking care so that there were
no obvious jags, like a foot sticking out too far, along all his body
Then the drow looked up to the stalactite, studied its form. He lifted
his hands to feel its tip, then ran them up and around the stalactite, 
joining with it smoothly, making sure that its tip remained the
smallest taper.
	He closed his eyes and tucked his head between his upper arms.
He swayed a few times, feeling his balance, smoothing the outer
edges of his form.
	Drizzt became a stalagmite mound.
	He soon heard sucking sounds, and squeaking, croaking voices
that he knew to be goblins’, all about him. He peeked out only once, 
and only for an instant, ensuring that they had no light sources.
How obvious he would be if a torch passed near him!
	But hiding in the lightless Underdark was very different from
hiding in a forest, even on a dark night. The trick here was to blur
the distinctive lines of body heat, and Drizzt felt confident that the
air about him, and the stalagmites, was at least as warm as his outer
cloak.
	He heard goblin footsteps barely a few feet away, knew that the
large troupe, it numbered at least twenty, Drizzt believed, was all
about him. He considered the exact movements it would take for
him to get his hands most quickly to his scimitars. If one of the gob 
lins brushed against him, the game would be up and he would
explode into motion, ripping at their ranks and trying to get beyond
them before they even realized that he was there.
	It never came to that. The goblin troupe continued on its way
through the host of stalactites and stalagmites and the one drow that
was not a mound of rock.
	Drizzt opened his lavender eyes, which blazed with the inner
fires of the hunter. He remained perfectly still for a few moments
longer, to ensure that there were no stragglers, then he ran off, mak 
ing not a sound.



	Catti-brie knew immediately that Drizzt had killed this six 
legged, tentacled, pantherlike beast. Kneeling over the carcass, she
recognized the curving, slashing wounds and doubted that anyone
else could have made so clean a kill.
	“It was Drizzt, ” she muttered to Guenhwyvar, and the panther
gave a low growl. “No more than two days old.”
	This dead monster reminded her of how vulnerable she might
be. If Drizzt, with all his training in stealth and in the ways of the
Underdark, had been forced into combat, then how could she hope
to pass unscathed?
	Catti-brie leaned against the black panther’s muscled flank, 
needing the support. She couldn’t keep Guenhwyvar with her for
much longer, she knew. The magical cat was a creature of the Astral
Plane and needed to return there often to rest. Catti-brie had meant
to spend her first hour in the tunnel alone, had meant to leave the
cave without the panther beside her, but her nerve had waned with
the first few steps. She needed the tangible support of her feline ally
in this foreign place. As the day had gone on, Catti-brie had become
somewhat more comfortable with her surroundings and had
planned to dismiss Guenhwyvar as soon as the trail became more
obvious, as soon as they found a region with fewer side passages. It
seemed that they had found that place, but they had found, too, the
carcass.
	Catti-brie started ahead quickly, instructing Guenhwyvar to
keep close to her side. She knew that she should release the panther
then, not tax Guenhwyvar ‘s strength in case she should need the cat
in an emergency, but she justified her delay by convincing herself
that many carrion monsters, or other six legged feline beasts, might
be about.
	Twenty minutes later, with the tunnels dark and quiet around
them, the young woman stopped and searched for her strength. Dis 
missing Guenhwyvar then was among the most courageous things
Catti-brie had ever done, and when the mist dissolved and Catti 
brie replaced the statuette into her pouch, she was glad indeed for
the gift Alustriel had given her.
	She was alone in the Underdark, alone in deep tunnels filled
with deadly foes. She could see, at least, and the starry illusion, 
beautiful even here against the gray stone bolstered her spirits.
	Catti-brie took a deep breath and steadied herself. She remem 
bered Wulfgar and spoke again her vow that no other friends would
be lost. Drizzt needed her; she could not let her fears defeat her.
	She took up the heart shaped locket, holding it tightly in her
hand so that its magical warmth would keep her on the proper path.
She set off again, forcing one foot in front of the other as she moved
farther from the world of the sun.



	Drizzt quickened his pace after the hot springs, for he now
remembered the way, and remembered, too, many of the enemies he
had to take care to avoid.
	Days passed uneventfully, became a week, and then two for the
running drow. It had taken Drizzt more than a month to get to the
surface from Blingdenstone, the gnome city some forty to fifty miles
west of Menzoberranzan, and now, with his belief that danger was
pressing Mithril Hall, he was determined to shorten that time.
	He came into tunnels winding and narrow, found a familiar
fork in the trail, one corridor cutting north and one continuing to the
west. Drizzt suspected that the northern route would get him more
quickly to the drow city, but he stayed the course west, hoping that
he might gain more information along that more familiar route, and
secretly hoping that he might find some old friends along the way
	He was still running a couple of days later, but he now paused
often and put his ear to the stone, listening for a rhythmic tap 
tapping sound. Blingdenstone was not far away, Drizzt knew, and
deep gnome miners might well be about. The halls remained silent, 
though, and Drizzt began to realize that he did not have much time.
He thought of going straight into the gnome city, but decided
against that course. He had spent too long on the road already; it
was time to draw near to Menzoberranzan.
	An hour later, cautiously rounding a bend in a low corridor that
was lined with glowing lichen, Drizzt’s keen ears caught a distant
noise. At first the drow smiled, thinking that he had found the elu 
sive miners, but as he continued to listen, catching the sounds of
metal scraping metal, even a cry, his expression greatly changed.
	A battle was raging, not so far away
	Drizzt sprinted off, using the increasingly loud echoes to guide
his steps. He came into one dead end and had to backtrack, but soon
was on the course again, scimitars drawn. He came to a fork in the
corridor, both tunnels continuing on in a similar direction, though
one rose sharply, and both resounding with the cries of battle.
	Drizzt decided to go up, running, crouching. Around a bend he
spotted an opening and knew that he had come upon the fight. He
eased out of the tunnel, moving onto a ledge twenty feet above a
wide chamber, its floor broken and dotted with stone mounds.
Below, svirfnebli and drow forms scrambled all about.
	Svirfnebli and drow! Drizzt fell back against the wall, his scimi 
tars slipping down to his sides. He knew that the svirfnebli, the
deep gnomes, were not evil, understood in his heart that the drow
had been the ones to instigate this fight, probably laying an ambush
for the gnome mining party Drizzt’s heart screamed at him to leap
down to aid the sorely pressed gnomes, but he could not find the
strength. He had fought drow, had killed drow, but never with a
clear conscience. These were his kin, his blood. Might there be
another Zak’nafein down there? Another Drizzt Do’Urden?
	One dark elf, in hot pursuit of a wounded gnome, scrambled up
the side of a rocky mound, only to find that it had become a living
rock, an earth elemental, ally of the gnomes. Great stony arms
wrapped about the dark elf and crushed him, the elemental taking
no notice of the weapons that nicked harmlessly off its natural rocky
armor.
	Drizzt winced at the gruesome sight, but was somewhat
relieved to see the gnomes holding their own. The elemental slowly
turned about, smashing down a blocking stalagmite and tearing its
great chunks of feet from the stone floor.
	The gnomes rallied behind their giant ally, trying to reform
some semblance of ranks amid the general chaos. They were mak 
ing progress, many of them zigzagging through the rocky maze to
link up with their mounting central force, and the dark elves
inevitably fell back from the dangerous giant. One burly gnome, a
burrow warden, Drizzt guessed, called for a straight march across
the cavern.
	Drizzt crouched low on the ledge. From his vantage point, he
could see the skilled drow warriors fanning out about the gnomes, 
flanking and hiding behind mounds. Another group slipped toward
the far exit, the gnomes’ destination, and took up strategic positions
there. If the elemental held out, though, the gnomes would likely
punch their way through, and, once into the corridor, they could put
their elemental behind them to block the way and run on to Bling 
denstone.
	Three drow females stepped out to confront the giant. Drizzt
sighed, seeing that they wore the unmistakable spider emblazoned
robes of Lloth worshippers. He recognized that these were priest 
esses, possibly high priestesses, and knew then that the gnomes
would not escape.
	One after another, the females chanted and threw their hands
out in front of them, sending forth a spray of fine mist. As the mois 
ture hit the rocky elemental, the giant began to dissolve, streaks of
mud replacing the solid stone.
	The priestesses kept up their chants, their assaults. On came the
rocky giant, growling with rage, its features distorted by the slip 
ping mud.
	A blast of mist hit it squarely, sending a thick line of mud run 
ning down the monster’s chest, but the priestess who had made the
assault was too concerned with her attack and did not get back fast
enough. A rock arm shot out and punched her, breaking bones and
hurling her through the air to crash against a stalagmite.
	The remaining two drow hit the elemental again, dissolving its
legs, and it crashed helplessly to the floor. It began to reform its
appendages immediately, but the priestesses continued their deadly
spray. Seeing that the ally was lost, the gnome leader called for a
charge, and the svirfnebli rushed on, overwhelming one priestess
before the flanking dark elves closed in like a biting maw. The fight
was on in full again, this time right below Drizzt Do’Urden.
	He gasped for breath as he witnessed the spectacle, saw a
gnome slashed repeatedly by three drow, to fall, screaming, dying, 
to the floor.
	Drizzt was out of excuses. He knew right from wrong, knew the
significance of the appearance of Lloth’s priestesses. Fires simmered
in his lavender eyes; out came his scimitars, Twinkle flaring to blue 
glowing life.
	He spotted the remaining priestess down to the left. She stood
beside a tall, narrow mound, one arm out touching a svirfneblin.
The gnome made no moves against her, only stood and groaned, 
trembling from the priestess’s magical assaults. Black energy crack 
led up the drow female’s arm as she literally sucked the life force
from her unfortunate victim.
	Drizzt tucked Twinkle under his other arm and leaped out, 
hooking the top of that narrow mound and rotating about it as he
quickly descended. He hit the floor right beside the priestess and
snapped his weapons back to the ready.
	The startled drow female uttered a series of sharp commands, 
apparently thinking Drizzt an ally Twinkle dove into her heart.
	The half drained gnome eyed Drizzt curiously, then fainted
away. Drizzt ran on, calling out warnings to the gnomes, in their
own tongue, that dark elves were in position near the far exit. The
ranger took care to keep out of the open, though, realizing that any
gnome he encountered would likely attack him, and any drow he
encountered might recognize him.
	He tried not to think of what he had just done, tried not to think
of the female’s eyes, so similar to his sister Vierna’s.
	He rushed in hard and put his back against a mound, the cries
of battle all about him. A gnome jumped out from behind another
stalagmite, waving a hammer dangerously, and before Drizzt could
explain that he was no enemy, another drow came around the side, 
to stand shoulder to shoulder with Drizzt.
	The suddenly hesitant gnome looked about, looked for an
escape route, but the newest opponent leaped at him.
	Purely on instinct, Drizzt slashed the drow’s weapon arm, his
scimitar drawing a deep gash. The ebon skinned elf dropped his
sword and half turned to look back in horror at this drow who was
not an ally. Stumbling, the surprised drow focused ahead, just in
time to catch a gnomish hammer in the face.
	The gnome didn’t understand it, of course, and as the dark elf
fell, all he thought about was readying his hammer for this second
enemy But Drizzt was long gone.
	With the priestesses down, a gnome shaman ran over to the
felled elemental. He placed a stone atop the pile of rubble and
crushed it with his mattock, then began chanting. Soon the elemen 
tal reformed, as large as ever, and lumbered away like a moving
avalanche in search of enemies. The shaman watched it go, but he
should have been watching his own situation instead, for another
dark elf crept out behind him, mace held high for a killing strike.
	The shaman realized the danger only as the mace came crashing
down.., and was intercepted by a scimitar.
	Drizzt shoved the shaman aside and stood to face the stunned
drow.
	Friend? the fingers of the drow’s free hand quickly asked.
	Drizzt shook his head, then sent Twinkle slamming against the
drow’s mace, batting it aside. The ranger’s second scimitar quickly
followed the same path, ringing loudly off the metal mace and
knocking it far out to Drizzt’s left.
	Drizzt’s advantage of surprise was not as great as he had sup 
posed, though, for the drow’s free left hand had already slipped to
his belt and grabbed a slender dirk. Out of the folds of the drow’s
piwafwi cloak shot the new weapon, straight for Drizzt’s heart, the
evil drow snarling in apparent victory
	Drizzt spun to the right, backsteppirig out of harm’s way. He
brought his closest scimitar back across and down, hooking the
dirk’s hilt and pulling the drow’s arm out straight. He completed
his spin, putting his back tightly against his opponent’s chest, 
wrapping the outstretched arm right about him. The drow tried to
work his mace into an angle so that he could strike at Drizzt, but
Drizzt was in the better position and was the quicker. He stepped
away, then came back in, elbow flying high to smash into his oppo 
nent’s face, once, twice, and then again in rapid succession.
	Drizzt flung the drow’s dirk hand out wide, and wisely reversed
his spin, getting Twinkle up just in time to catch the swinging mace.
Drizzt’s other arm shot forward, the hilt of his scimitar crushing the
drow’s face.
	The evil drow tried to hold his balance, but he was clearly
dazed. A quick twist and snap of Twinkle sent the mace flying into
the air, and Drizzt punched out with his left hand, Twinkle’s hilt
catching the drow on the side of the jaw and dropping him to the
floor.
	Drizzt looked to the gnome shaman, who stood open mouthed, 
clutching his hammer nervously. All around them, the fight had
become a rout, with the revived elemental leading the svirfnebli to a
decisive victory
	Two other gnomes joined the shaman and eyed Drizzt with sus 
picion and fear. Drizzt paused a moment to consider the Svirfneblin
tongue, a language that used the melodic inflections similar to sur 
face Elvish alongside the hard consonant sounds more typical of
Dwarvish talk.
	“I am no enemy, ” he said, and to prove his point he dropped his
scimitars to the ground.
	The drow on the floor groaned. A gnome sprang upon him and
lined his pickaxe up with the back of the dark elf’s skull.
	“No!” Drizzt cried in protest, starting forward and bending low
to intercept the strike.
	Drizzt stood up straight suddenly, though, as a searing flash of
pain erupted along his backbone. He saw the gnome finish the
dazed drow, but couldn’t begin to contemplate that brutal action as
a series of minor explosions went off down his spine. The lip of
some devious, flat edged club ran down his vertebrae like a board
snapping across a picket fence.
	Then it was over and Drizzt stood motionlessly for what
seemed like a very long time. He felt his legs tingle, as though they
had gone to sleep, then felt nothing at all below his waist. He fought
to hold his balance, but wobbled and fell, and lay scratching at the
stone floor and trying to find his breath.
	He knew that the darkness of unconsciousness, or a deeper
darkness still, was fast approaching, for he could hardly remember
where he was or why he had come.
	He did hear the shaman, but that small flicker of consciousness
that Drizzt had remaining was not comforted by the shaman’s
words.
	Kill him.


Chapter 11

FUTILITY


	This the place?” the battlerager asked, shouting so that
his gruff voice could be heard over the whipping wind.
He had come out of Mithril Hall with Regis and Brue 
nor, had forced the halfling to take him out, actually, 
in search of the body of Artemis Entreri. “Ye find the clues where ye
find them, ” Pwent had said in typically cryptic explanation.
	Regis pulled the cowl of his oversized cloak low to ward off the
wind’s sting. They were in a narrow valley, a gully, the sides of
which seemed to focus the considerable wind into a torrent. “It was
around here, ” Regis said, shrugging his shoulders to indicate that
he could not be sure. When he had come out to find the battered
Entreri, he had taken a higher route, along the top of the ravine and
other ledges. He was certain that he was in the general region, but
things looked too different from this perspective to be sure.
	“We’ll find him, me king, ” Thibbledorf assured Bruenor.
	“For what that’s worth, ” the dejected Bruenor grumbled.
	Regis winced at the dwarf’s deflated tones. He recognized
clearly that Bruenor was slipping back into despair. The dwarves
had found no way through the maze of tunnels beneath Mithril
Hall, though a thousand were searching, and word from the east
was not promising, if Catti-brie and Drizzt had gone to Silvery 
moon, they were long past that place now. Bruenor was coming to
realize the futility of it all. Weeks had passed and he had not found a
way out of Mithril Hall that would take him anywhere near his
friends. The dwarf was losing hope.
	“But, me king!” Pwent roared. “He knows the way.”
	“He’s dead, ” Bruenor reminded the battlerager.
	“Not to worry!” bellowed Pwent. “Priests can talk to the dead, 
and he might have a map. Oh, we’ll find our way to this drow city, I
tell ye, and there I’ll go, for me king! I’ll kill every stinking drow, 
except that ranger fellow, ” he added, throwing a wink at Regis, “, 
and bring yer girl back home!”
	Bruenor just sighed and motioned for Pwent to get on with the
hunt. Despite all the complaining, though, the dwarf king privately
hoped that he might find some satisfaction in seeing Entreri’s bro 
ken body.
	They moved on for a short while, Regis constantly peeking out
from his cowl, trying to get his bearings. Finally, the halfling spotted
a high outcropping, a branchlike jag of rock.
	“There, ” he said, pointing the way. “That must be it.”
	Pwent looked up, then followed a direct line to the ravine’s bot 
tom. He began scrambling around on all fours, sniffing the ground
as if trying to pick up the corpse’s scent.
	Regis watched him, amused, then turned to Bruenor, who stood
against the gully’s wall, his hand on the stone, shaking his head.
	“What is it?” Regis asked, walking over. Hearing the question
and noticing his king, Pwent scampered to join them.
	When he got close, Regis noticed something along the stone
wall, something gray and matted. He peered closer as Bruenor
pulled a bit of the substance from the stone and held it out.
	“What is it?” Regis asked again, daring to touch it. A stringy fil 
ament came away with his retracting finger, and it took some effort
to shake the gooey stuff free.
	Bruenor had to swallow hard several times. Pwent ran off, sniff 
ing at the wall, then across the ravine to consider the stone on the
other side.
	“It’s what’s left of a web, ” the dwarf king answered grimly.
	Both Bruenor and Regis looked up to the jutting rock and
silently considered the implications of a web strung below the
falling assassin.



	Fingers flashed too quickly for him to follow, conveying some
instructions that the assassin did not understand. He shook his head
furiously, and the flustered drow clapped his ebon skinned hands
together, uttered, “Iblith, ” and walked away.
	Iblith, Artemis Entreri echoed silently in his thoughts. The drow
word for offal, it was the word he had heard the most since Jarlaxle
had taken him to this wretched place. What could that drow soldier
have expected from him? He was only beginning to learn the intri 
cate drow hand code, its finger movements so precise and detailed
that Entreri doubted that one in twenty humans could even begin to
manage it. And he was trying desperately to learn the drow spoken
language as well. He knew a few words and had a basic under 
standing of drow sentence structure, so he could put simple ideas
together.
	And he knew the word iblith all too well.
	The assassin leaned back against the wall of the small cave, this
week’s base of operations for Bregan D’aerthe. He felt smaller, more
insignificant, than ever. When Jarlaxle had first revived him, in a
cave in the ravine outside of Mithril Hall, he had thought the merce 
nary’s offer (actually more of a command, Entreri now realized) to
take him to Menzoberranzan a wonderful thing, a grand adventure.
	This was no adventure; this was living hell. Entreri was
colnbluth, non drow, living in the midst of twenty thousand of the
less than tolerant race. They didn’t particularly hate humans, no
more than they hated everybody else, but because he was colnbluth, 
non drow, the once powerful assassin found himself beneath the
lowest ranks of Bregan D’aerthe’s drow force. No matter what he
did, no matter who he killed, in Menzoberranzan, Artemis Entreri
could never rank higher than twenty thousand and first.
	And the spiders! Entreri hated spiders, and the crawly things
were everywhere in the drow city. They were bred into larger, more
poisonous varieties, and were kept as pets. And to kill a spider was
a crime carrying the punishment of jivvin quui’elghinn, torture until
death. In the great cavern’s eastern end, the moss bed and mush 
room grove near the lake of Donigarten, where Entreri was often
put to work herding goblin slaves, spiders crawled about by the
thousands. They crawled around him, crawled on him, hung down
in strands, dangling inches from the tormented man’s face.
	The assassin drew his green gleaming sword and held its
wicked edge before his eyes. At least there was more light now in
the city; for some reason that Entreri did not know, magical lights
and flickering torches had become much more common in Menzo 
berranzan.
	“It would not be wise to stain so marvelous a weapon with
drow blood, ” came a familiar voice from the doorway, easily speak 
ing the Common tongue. Entreri didn’t take his gaze from the blade
as Jarlaxle entered the small room.
	“You presume that I would find the strength to harm one of the
mighty drow, ” the assassin replied. “How could I, the iblith, . . .“ he
started to ask, but Jarlaxle’s laughter mocked his self pity. Entreri
glanced over at the mercenary and saw the drow holding his wide 
brimmed hat in his hand, fiddling with the diatryma feather.
	“I have never underestimated your prowess, assassin, ” Jarlaxle
said. “You have survived several fights against Drizzt Do’Urden, 
and few in Menzoberranzan will ever make that claim.”
	“I was his fighting equal, ” Entreri said through gritted teeth.
Simply uttering the words stung him. He had battled Drizzt several
times, but only twice had they fought without a premature interrup 
tion. On both those occasions, Entreri had lost. Entreri wanted des 
perately to even the score, to prove himself the better fighter. Still, 
he had to admit, to himself, at least, that in his heart he did not
desire another fight with Drizzt. After the first time he had lost to
Drizzt, in the muddy sewers and streets of Calimport, Entreri had
lived every day plotting revenge, had shaped his life around one
event, his rematch with Drizzt. But after his second loss, the one in
which he had wound up hanging, broken and miserable, from a jag
of rock in a windswept ravine...
	But what? Entreri wondered. Why did he no longer wish to
battle that renegade drow? Had the point been proven, the decision
rendered? Or was he simply too afraid? The emotions were unset 
tling to Artemis Entreri, as out of place within him as he was in the
city of drow.
	“I was his fighting equal, ” he whispered again, with as much
conviction as he could muster.
	“I would not state that openly if I were you, ” the mercenary
replied. “Dantrag Baenre and Uthegental Armgo would fight one
another simply to determine which of them got to kill you first.”
	Entreri did not blink; his sword flared, as if reflecting his sim 
mering pride and anger.
	Jarlaxle laughed again. “To determine which would get to fight
you first, ” the mercenary corrected, and he swept a low and apolo 
getic bow.
	Still the out of place assassin didn’t blink. Might he regain a
measure of pride by killing one of these legendary drow warriors?
he wondered. Or would he lose again, and, worse than being killed, 
be forced to live with that fact?
	Entreri snapped the sword down and slipped it into its scab 
bard. He had never been so hesitant, so unsure. Even as a young
boy, surviving on the brutal streets of Calimshan’s crowded cities, 
Entreri had brimmed with confidence, and had used that confidence
to advantage. But not here, not in this place.
	“Your soldiers taunt me, ” he snapped suddenly, transferring his
frustration the mercenary’s way.
	Jarlaxle laughed and put his hat back on his bald head. “Kill a
few, ” he offered, and Entreri couldn’t tell if the cold, calculating
drow was kidding or not. “The rest will then leave you alone.”
	Entreri spat on the floor. Leave him alone? The rest would wait
until he was asleep, then cut him into little pieces to feed to the spi 
ders of Donigarten. That thought broke the assassin’s narrow eyed
concentration, forced him to wince. He had killed a female (which, 
in Menzoberranzan, was much worse than killing a male), and some
house in the city might be starving their spiders right now in antici 
pation of a human feast.
	“Ah, but you are so crude, ” the mercenary said, as though he
pitied the man. Entreri sighed and looked away, bringing a hand up
to rub his saliva wetted lips. What was he becoming? In Calimport, 
in the guilds, even among the pashas and those others that called
themselves his masters, he had been in control. He was a killer hired
by the most treacherous, double dealing thieves in all the Realms, 
and yet, not one had ever tried to cross Artemis Entreri. How he
longed to see the pale sky of Calimport again!
	“Fear not, my abbil, ” Jarlaxle said, using the drow word for
trusted friend. “You will again see the sunrise.” The mercenary
smiled widely at Entreri’s expression, apparently understanding
that he had just read the assassin’s very thoughts. “You and I will
watch the dawn from the doorstep of Mithril Hall.”
	They were going back after Drizzt, Entreri realized. This time, 
judging from the lights in Menzoberranzan, which he now came to
understand, Clan Battlehammer itself would be crushed!
	“That is, ” Jarlaxle continued teasingly, “unless House Horlbar
takes the time to discover that it was you who slew one of its matron
mothers. ~
	With a click of his boot and a tip of his hat, Jarlaxle spun out of
the room.
	Jarlaxle knew! And the female had been a matron mother! Feel 
ing perfectly miserable, Entreri leaned heavily against the wall.
How was he to know that the wicked beast in the alley was a
damned matron mother?
	The walls seemed to close in on the man, suffocating him. Cold
sweat beaded on his normally cool brow, and he labored to draw
breath. All his thoughts centered on possible escape, but they
inevitably slammed against unyielding stone walls. He was caught
by logistics as much as by drow blades.
	He had tried to escape once, had run out of Menzoberranzan
through the eastern exit, beyond Donigarten. But where could he
go? The Underdark was a maze of dangerous tunnels and deep
holes filled with monsters the assassin did not know how to fight.
Entreri was a creature of the very different surface world. He did
not understand the wild Underdark, could not hope to survive there
for long. Certainly he would never find his own way back to the
surface. He was trapped, caged, stripped of his pride and his dig 
nity, and, sooner or later, he was going to be horribly killed.






Chapter 12

RISING TO

THE OCCASION
	We can drop this whole section, ” General Dagna re 
marked as he poked a stubby finger against the map
spread on the table.
	“Drop it?” bellowed the battlerager. “If ye drop it, 
then how’re we to kill the stinking drow?”
	Regis, who had arranged this meeting, looked incredulously to
Dagna and the other three dwarven commanders huddled about the
table. Then he looked back to Pwent. “The ceiling will kill the stink 
ing drow/’ he explained.
	“Bah, sandstone!” huffed the battlerager. “What fun do ye call
that? I got to grease up me armor with some drow blood, I do, but
with yer stupid plan, I’ll have to do a month’s digging just to find a
body to rub against.”
	“Lead the charge down here, ” Dagna offered, pointing to
another section of open corridors on the map. “The rest of us’ll give
ye a hunnerd foot head start.”
	Regis put a sour look on the general and moved it, in turn, to
each of the other dwarves, who were all bobbing their heads in
agreement. Dagna was only half kidding, Regis knew. More than a
few of Clan Battlehammer would not be teary eyed if obnoxious
Thibbledorf Pwent happened to be among the fallen in the potential
fight against the dark elves.
	“Drop the tunnel, ” Regis said to get them back on track. “We’ll
need strong defenses here and here, ” he added, pointing to two
open areas in the otherwise tight lower tunnels. “I’m meeting later
this day with Berkthgar of Settlestone.”
	“Ye’re bringin’ the smelly humans in?” Pwent asked.
	•Even the dwarves, who favored the strong smells of soot 
covered, sweaty bodies, twisted their faces at the remark. In Mithril
Hall, it was said that Pwent’s armpit could curl a hardy flower at
fifty yards.
	“I don’t know what I’m doing with the humans, ” Regis answered.
“I haven’t even told them my suspicions of a drow raid yet. If they
agree to join our cause, and I have no reason to believe that they
won’t, I suspect that we would be wise to keep them out of the
lower tunnels, even though we plan to light those tunnels.”
	Dagna nodded his agreement. “A wise choice indeed, ” he said.
“The tall men are better suited to fighting along the mountainsides.
Me own guess is that the drow’ll come in around the mountain as
well as through it.”
	“The men of Settlestone will meet them, ” added another dwarf.



	From the shadows of a partly closed door at the side of the
room, Bruenor Battlehammer looked on curiously. He was amazed
at how quickly Regis had taken things into his control, especially
given the fact that the halfling did not wear his hypnotic ruby
pendant. After scolding Bruenor for not acting quickly and deci 
sively, for falling back into a mire of self pity with the trails to Catti 
brie and Drizzt apparently closed, the halfling, with Pwent in tow, 
had gone straight to General Dagna and the other war commanders.
	What amazed Bruenor now was not the fact that the dwarves
had gone eagerly into preparations for war, but the fact that Regis
seemed to be leading them. Of course, the halfling had concocted a
lie to assume that role. Using Bruenor’s resumed indifference, the
halfling was faking meetings with the dwarf king, then going to
Dagna and the others pretending that he was bringing word straight
from Bruenor.
	When he first discovered the ruse, Bruenor wanted to throttle
the halfling, but Regis had stood up to him, and had offered, more
than sincerely, to step aside if Bruenor wanted to take over.
	Bruenor wished that he could, desperately wanted to find that
level of energy once more, but any thought of warfare inevitably led
him to memories of his recent past battles, most of them beside
Drizzt, Catti-brie, and Wulfgar. Paralyzed by those painful memo 
ries, Bruenor had simply dismissed Regis and allowed the halfling
to go on with his facade.
	Dagna was as fine a strategist as any, but his experience was
rather limited regarding races other than dwarves or stupid goblins.
Regis was among Drizzt’s best friends, had sat and listened to
Drizzt’s tales of his homeland and his kin hundreds of times. Regis
had also been among Wulfgar’s best friends, and so he understood
the barbarians, whom the dwarves would need as allies should the
war come to pass.
	Still, Dagna had never been fond of anyone who wasn’t a dwarf, 
and the fact that he wholeheartedly accepted the advice of a half 
ling, and one not known for bravery!, surprised Bruenor more
than a little.
	It stung the king as well. Bruenor knew of the dark elves and
the barbarians at least as well as Regis, and he understood dwarven
tactics better than anyone. He should be at that table, pointing out
the sections on the map; he should be the one, with Regis beside
him, to meet with Berkthgar the Bold.
	Bruenor dropped his gaze to the floor, rubbed a hand over his
brow and down his grotesque scar. He felt an ache in the hollow
socket. Hollow, too, was his heart, empty with the loss of Wulfgar, 
and breaking apart at the thought that Drizzt and his precious Catti 
brie had gone off into danger.
	The events about him had gone beyond his responsibilities as
king of Mithril Hall. Bruenor ‘s first dedication was to his children, 
one lost, the other missing, and to his friends. Their fates were
beyond him now; he could only hope that they would win out, 
would survive and come back to him, for Bruenor had no way to get
to Catti-brie and Drizzt.
	Bruenor could never get back to Wulfgar.
	The dwarf king sighed and turned away, walking slowly back
toward his empty room, not even noticing that the meeting had
adjourned.
	Regis watched Bruenor silently from the doorway, wishing that
he had his ruby pendant, if for no other reason than to try to re 
kindle the fires in the broken dwarf.



	Catti-brie eyed the wide corridor ahead suspiciously, trying to
make out distinct shapes among the many stalagmite mounds. She
had come into a region where mud mixed with stone, and she had
seen the tracks clearly enough, goblin tracks, she knew, and recent.
	Ahead loomed the perfect place for an ambush. Catti-brie took
an arrow from the quiver strapped behind her hip, then held Taul 
maril the Heartseeker, her magical bow, ready in her hands. Tucked
under one arm, ready to be dropped, was the panther figurine. She
silently debated whether or not she should summon Guenhwyvar
from the Astral Plane. She had no real proof that the goblins were
about, all the mounds in the corridor seemed natural and benign, 
but she felt the hairs on the back of her neck tingle.
	She decided to hold off calling the cat, her logic overruling her
instincts. She fell against the left hand wall and slowly started for 
ward, wincing every time the mud sloshed around her lifting boot.
	With a dozen stalagmite mounds behind her, the wall still
tightly to her left, the young woman paused and listened once more.
All seemed perfectly quiet, but she couldn’t shake the feeling that
her every step was being monitored, that some monster was poised
not far away, waiting to spring out and throttle her. Would it be like
this all the way through the Underdark? she wondered. Would she
drive herself insane with imagined dangers? Or worse, would the
false alarms of her misguided instincts take her off guard on that
one occasion when danger really did rise against her?
	Catti-brie shook her head to clear the thoughts and squinted her
eyes to peer into the magically starlit gloom. Another benefit of
Lady Alustriel’s gift was that Catti-brie’s eyes did not glow with the
telltale red of infravision. The young woman, though, inexperienced
in such matters, didn’t know that; she knew only that the shapes
ahead seemed ominous indeed. The ground and walls were not
firmly set, as in other parts of the tunnels. Mud and open water
flowed freely in different areas. Many of the stalagmites seemed to
have appendages, goblin arms, perhaps, holding wicked weapons.
	Again Catti-brie forced away the unwanted thoughts, and she
started forward, but froze immediately. She had caught a sound, a
slight scraping, like that of a weapon tip brushing against stone. She
waited a long while but heard nothing more, so she again told her 
self not to let her imagination carry her away.
	But had those goblin tracks been part of her imagination? she
asked herself as she took another step forward.
	Catti-brie dropped the figurine and swung about, her bow com 
ing to bear. Around the nearest stalagmite charged a goblin, its ugly, 
flat face seeming broader for the wide grin it wore and its rusting
and jagged sword held high above its head.
	Catti-brie fired, point blank, and the silver streaking arrow had
barely cleared the bow when the monster’s head exploded in a
shower of multicolored sparks. The arrow blasted right through, 
sparking again as it sliced a chunk off the stalagmite mound.
	“Guenhwyvar!” Catti-brie called, and she readied the bow. She
knew she had to get moving, that this area had been clearly marked
by the spark shower. She considered the gray mist that had begun to
swirl about her, and, knowing the summoning was complete, 
scooped up the figurine and ran away from the wall. She hopped
the dead goblin’s body and cut around the nearest stalagmite, then
slipped between two others. Out of the corner of her eye she saw
another four foot tall huddled shape. An arrow streaked off in pur 
suit, its silvery trail stealing the darkness, and scored another hit.
Catti-brie did not smile, though, for the flash of light revealed a
dozen more of the ugly humanoids, slinking and crawling about the
mounds.
	They screamed and hooted and began their charge.
	Over by the wall, gray mist gave way to the powerful panther’s
tangible form. Guenhwyvar had recognized the urgency of the call
and was on the alert immediately, ears flattened and shining green
eyes peering about, taking full measure of the scene. Quieter than
the night, the cat loped off.
	Catti-brie circled farther out from the wall, taking a roundabout
course to flank the approaching group. Every time she came past
another blocking mound, she let fly an arrow, as often hitting stone
as goblins. She knew that confusion was her ally here, that she had
to keep the creatures from organizing, or they would surround her.
	Another arrow streaked away, and in its illumination Catti-brie
saw a closer target, a goblin crouched right behind the mound she
would soon pass. She went behind the mound, skidded to a stop, 
and came back out the same way, desperately working to fit an
arrow.
	The goblin swung around the mound and rushed in, sword
leading. Catti-brie batted with her bow, barely knocking the weapon
aside. She heard a sucking sound behind her, then a hiss, and
instinctively dropped to her knees.
	A goblin pitched over her suddenly low form and crashed into
its surprised ally. The two were up quickly, though, as quickly as
Catti-brie. The woman worked her bow out in front to keep them at
bay, tried to get her free hand down to grab at the jeweled dagger on
her belt.
	Sensing their advantage, the goblins charged, then went tum 
bling away along with six hundred pounds of flying panther.
	“Guen, ” Catti-brie mouthed in silent appreciation, and she piv 
oted about, pulling an arrow from her quiver. As she expected, gob 
lins were fast closing from behind.
	Taulmaril twanged once, again, and then a third time, Catti-brie
blasting holes in the ranks. She used the sudden and deadly explo 
sions of streaking lines and sparks as cover and ran, not away, as she
knew the goblins would expect, but straight ahead, backtracking
along her original route.
	She had them fooled as she ducked behind another mound, 
wide and thick, and nearly giggled when a goblin leaped out behind
her, rubbing its light shmg eyes and looking back the other way.
	Just five feet behind the stupid thing, Catti-brie let fly, the arrow
blasting into the goblin’s back, snaring on a bone, and sending the
creature flying through the air.
	Catti-brie spun and ran on, around the back side of the wide
mound. She heard a roar from Guenhwyvar, followed by the pro 
found screams of another group of goblins. Ahead, a huddled form
was running away from her, and she lifted her bow, ready to clear
the path.
	Something jolted her on the hip. She released the bowstring, 
and the arrow zipped wide of the mark, scorching a hole in the wall.
	Catti-brie stumbled off balance, startled and hurt. She banged
her shin against a jutting stone and nearly pitched headlong, skid 
ding to a stop down on one knee. As she reached down to get
another arrow from her quiver, she felt the wet warmth of her
lifeblood pouring generously from a deep gash in her hip. Only then
did stunned Catti-brie realize the hot waves of agony.
	She kept her wits about her and turned as she fitted the arrow.
	The goblin was right above her, its breath coming hot and
smelly through pointed yellow teeth. Its sword was high above its
head.
	Catti-brie let fly. The goblin jerked up into the air, but came back
to its feet. Behind it, another goblin caught the arrow under the chin, 
the powerful bolt blowing the back of its skull off.
	Catti-brie thought she was dead. How could she have missed?
Did the arrow slip under the goblin’s arm as it jumped in fright? It
made no sense to her, but she could hardly stop to think it over. The
moment of death was upon her, she was sure, for she could not
maneuver her bow quickly enough to parry the goblin’s next strike.
She could not block the descending sword.
	But the sword did not descend. The goblin simply stopped, held
perfectly still for what seemed to Catti-brie an interminable time. Its
sword then clanged to the stone; a wheeze issued from the center of
its rib cage, followed by a thick line of blood. The monster toppled
to the side, dead.
	Catti-brie realized that her arrow had indeed hit the mark, had
driven cleanly through the first goblin to kill the second.
	Catti-brie forced herself to her feet. She tried to run on, but
waves rolled over her, and before she understood what had hap 
pened, she was back to the floor, back to one knee. She felt a cold 
ness up her side, a swirling nausea in her stomach, and, to her
horror, saw yet another of the miserable goblins fast closing, waving
a spiked club.
	Summoning all of her strength, Catti-brie Waited until the very
last moment and whipped her bow across in front of her. The goblin
shrieked and fell backward, avoiding the hit, but its sudden retreat
gave Catti-brie the time to draw her short sword and the jeweled
dagger.
	She stood, forcing down the pain and the sick feeling.
	The goblin uttered something in its annoying, high pitched
voice, something threatening, Catti-brie knew, though it sounded
like a typical goblin whine. The wretched creature came at her all of
a sudden, whipping the club to and fro, and Catti-brie leaped back.
	A jolting flare of agony rushed up her side, nearly costing her
her balance. On came the goblin, crouched and balanced, sensing
victory.
	It continued to talk to her, taunt her, though she could not
understand its language. It chuckled and pointed to her wounded
leg.
	Catti-brie was confident that she could defeat the goblin, but
she feared that it would be to no avail. Even if she and Guenhwyvar
won out, killed all the goblins or sent them fleeing, what might
come next? Her leg would barely support her, certainly she could
not continue her quest, and she doubted that she could properly
clean and dress the wound. The goblins might not kill her, but they
had stopped her, and the waves of pain continued unabated.
	Catti-brie’s eyes rolled back and she started to sway.
	Her eyes blinked open and she steadied herself as the goblin
took the bait and charged. When it realized the ruse, it tried to stop, 
but skidded in the slippery mud.
	The goblin whipped its club across frantically, but Catti-brie’s
short sword intercepted it, locking against one of the spikes. Know 
ing that she had not the strength to force the club aside, she pressed
forward, into the goblin, tucking her sword arm in close as she
went, forcing the goblin’s arm to hook about her as she turned.
	All the while, the jeweled dagger led the way, reaching for the
creature’s belly. The goblin got its free arm up to block, and only the
dagger’s tip slipped through its skin.
	Catti-brie did not know how long she could hold the clinch. Her
strength was draining; she wanted nothing more than to curl up in a
little ball and faint away.
	Then, to her surprise, the goblin cried out in agony. It whipped
its head back and forth, shook its whole body wildly in an effort to
get away. Catti-brie, barely holding the dangerous club at bay, had
to keep pace with it.
	A burst of energy pulsed through the dagger and coursed up
her arm.
	The young woman didn’t know what to make of it, didn’t know
what was happening, as the goblin went into a series of violent con 
vulsions, each one sending another pulse of energy flowing into its
foe.
	The creature fell back against a stone, its blocking arm limp, and
Catti-brie’s momentum carried her closer, the wicked dagger sink 
ing in to the hilt. The next pulse of energy nearly knocked Catti-brie
away, and her eyes widened in horror as she realized that Artemis
Entreri’s weapon was literally eating away at the goblin’s life force
and transferring it to her!
	The goblin sprawled over the arcing edge of the stalagmite
mound, its eyes open and unblinking, its body twitching in death
spasms.
	Catti-brie fell back, taking the bloodied dagger with her. She
worked hard to draw breath, gasping in disbelief and eyeing the
blade with sheer revulsion.
	A roar from Guenhwyvar reminded her that the battle was not
ended. She replaced the dagger on her belt and turned, thinking
that she had to find her bow. She had gone two running steps before
she even realized that her leg was easily supporting her now.
	From somewhere in the shadows, a goblin heaved a spear, 
which skipped off the stone just behind the running woman and
stole her train of thought. Catti-brie skidded down in the mud and
scooped up her bow as she slid past. She looked down to her quiver, 
saw its powerful magic already at work replacing the spent arrows.
	She saw, too, that no more blood was coming from her wound.
Gingerly, the young woman ran a hand over it, felt a thick scab
already in place. She shook her head in disbelief, took up her bow, 
and began firing.
	Only one more goblin got close to Catti-brie. It sneaked around
the back side of the thick mound. The young woman started to drop
her bow and draw out her weapons for melee, but she stopped (and so
did the goblin!) when a great panther’s paw slapped down atop the
creature’s head and long claws dug into the goblin’s sloping forehead.
	Guenhwyvar snapped the creature backward with sudden, sav 
age force such that one of the monster’s shoddy boots remained
where it had been standing. Catti-brie looked away, back to the area
behind them, as Guenhwyvar’s powerful maw closed over the
stunned goblin’s throat and began to squeeze.
	Catti-brie saw no targets, but let fly another arrow to brighten
the end of the corridor. Half a dozen goblins were in full flight, and
Catti-brie sent a shower of arrows trailing them, chasing them, and
cutting them down.
	She was still firing a minute later, her enchanted quiver would
never run short of arrows, when Guenhwyvar padded over to her
and bumped against her, demanding a pat. Catti-brie sighed deeply
and dropped a hand to the cat’s muscled flank, her eyes falling to
the jeweled dagger, sitting impassively on her belt.
	She had seen Entreri wield that dagger, had once had its blade
against her own throat. The young woman shuddered as she
recalled that awful moment, more awful now that she understood
the cruel weapon’s properties.
	Guenhwyvar growled and pushed against her, prodding her to
motion. Catti-brie understood the panther’s urgency; according to
Drizzt’s tales, goblins rarely traveled in the Underdark in secluded
bands. If there were twenty here, there were likely two hundred
somewhere nearby.
	Catti-brie looked to the tunnel behind them, the tunnel from
which she had come and down which the goblins had fled. She con 
sidered, briefly, going that way, fighting through the fleeing few and
running back to the surface world, where she belonged.
	It was a fleeting thought for her, an excusable instant of weak 
ness. She knew that she must go on, but how? Catti-brie looked
down to her belt once more and smiled as she untied the magical
mask. She lifted it before her face, unsure of how it even worked.
	With a shrug to Guenhwyvar, the young woman pressed the
mask against her face.
	Nothing happened.
	Holding it tight, she thought of Drizzt, imagined herself with
ebony skin and the fine chiseled features of a drow.
	Biting tingles of magic nipped at her every pore. In a moment, 
she moved her hand away from her face, the mask holding fast of its
own accord. Catti-brie blinked many times, for in the magical
starlight afforded her by the Cat’s Eye, she saw her receding hand
shining perfectly black, her fingers more slender and delicate than
she remembered them.
	How easy it had been!
	Catti-brie wished that she had a mirror so that she could check
the disguise, though she felt in her heart that it was true. She consid 
ered how perfectly Entreri had mimicked Regis when he had come
back to Mithril Hall, right down to the halfling’s equipment. With
that thought, the young woman looked to her own rather drab garb.
She considered Drizzt’s tales of his homeland, of the fabulous and
evil high priestesses of Lloth.
	Catti-brie’s worn traveling cloak had become a rich robe, shim 
mering purple and black. Her boots had blackened, their tips curl 
ing up delicately. Her weapons remained the same, though, and it
seemed to Catti-brie, in this attire, that Entreri’s jeweled dagger was
the most fitting.
	Again the young woman focused her thoughts on that wicked
blade. A part of her wanted to drop it in the mud, to bury it where
no one could ever find it. She even went so far as to close her fingers
over its hilt.
	But she released the dagger immediately, strengthened her
resolve, and smoothed her drowlike robes. The blade had helped
her; without it she would be crippled and lost, if not dead. It was a
weapon, like her bow, and, though its brutal tactics assaulted her
sensibilities, Catti-brie came, in that moment, to accept them. She
carried the dagger more easily as the days turned into a week, and
then two.
	This was the Underdark, where the savage survived.

Part 3
SHADOWS
here are no shadows in the Underdark.
	Only after years on the surface have I come to under 
stand the sign ficance of that seemingly minute fact, the sig 
nificance of the contrast between lightness and darkness.
There are no shadows in the Underdark, no areas of mystery where only the
imagination can go.
	What a marvelous thing is a shadow! I have seen my own silhouette
walk under me as the sun rode high; I have seen a gopher grow to the size of
a large bear, the light low behind him, spreading his ominous silhouette far
across the ground. I have walked through the woods at twilight, my gaze
alternating between the lighter areas catching the last rays of day, leafy
green slipping to gray, and those darkening patches, those areas where only
my mind’s eye could go. Might a monster be there? An orc or a goblin? Or
might a hidden treasure, as magn~ficent as a lost, enchanted sword or as
simple as a fox’s den, lay within the sheltering gloom?
	When I walk the woods at twilight, my imagination walks beside me, 
heightens my senses, opens my mind to any possibilities. But there are no
shadows in the Underdark, and there is no room forfanciful imagining.
All, everywhere, is gripped in a brooding, continual, predatory hush and a
very real, ever present danger.
	To imagine a crouched enemy, or a hidden treasure, is an exercise in
enjoyment, a conjured state of alertness, of aliveness. But when that enemy
is too often real and not imagined, when every jag in the stone, every
potential hiding place, becomes a source of tension, then the game is not so
much fun.
	One cannot walk the corridors of the Underdark with his imagination
beside him. To imagine an enemy behind one stone might well blind a per 
son to the very real enemy behind another. To slip into a daydream is to lose
that edge of readiness, and in the Underdark, to be unwary is to die.
	This proved the most difficult transition for me when I went back into
those lightless corridors. I had to again become the primal hunter, had to
survive, every moment, on that instinctual edge, a state of nervous energy
that kept my muscles always taut, always ready to spring. Every step of the
way, the present was all that mattered, the search for potential hiding
places of potential enemies. I could not afford to imagine those enemies. I
had to wait for them and watch for them, react to any movements.
	There are no shadows in the Underdark. There is no room for imagina 
tion in the Underdark. It is a place for alertness, but not aliveness, a place
with no room for hopes and dreams.

-Drizzt Do’Urden

Chapter 13

HUNGRY GODDESS


	Councilor Firble of Blingdenstone normally enjoyed his
journeys out of the deep gnome city, but not this day.
The little gnome stood in a small chamber, but its
dimensions seemed huge to him, for he felt quite vul 
nerable. He kicked his hard boots about the rocks on the otherwise
smooth floor, twiddled his stubby fingers behind his back, and
every so often ran a hand over his almost bald head, wiping away
lines of sweat.
	A dozen tunnels ran into this chamber, and Firble took some
comfort in the knowledge that two score svirfnebli warriors stood
ready to rush to his aid, including several shamans with enchanted
stones that could summon elemental giants from the plane of earth.
Firble understood the drow of Menzoberranzan, forty five miles to
the east of Blingdenstone, better than any of his kin, though, and
even his armed escort’s presence did not allow him to relax. The
gnome councilor knew well that if the dark elves had set this up as
an ambush, then all the gnomes and all the magic of Blingdenstone
might not be enough.
	A familiar clicking sounded from the tunnel directly across the
small chamber and, a moment later, in swept Jarlaxle, the extraordi 
nary drow mercenary, his wide brimmed hat festooned with a giant
diatryma feather, his vest cut high to reveal rolling lines of muscles
across his abdomen. He strode before the gnome, glanced about a
couple of times to take in the whole scene, then dipped into a low
bow, brushing his hat across the floor with an outstretched hand.
	“My greetings!” Jarlaxle said heartily as he came back upright, 
crooking his arm above him so that the hat tucked against his elbow.
A snap of the arm sent the hat into a short spin, to land perfectly
atop the swaggering mercenary’s shaved head.
	“High soar your spirits this day, ” Firble remarked.
	“And why not?” the drow asked. “It’s another glorious day in
the Underdark! A day to be enjoyed.”
	Firble did not seem convinced, but he was amazed, as always, 
by the conniving drow’s command of the Svirfneblin language. Jar 
laxle spoke the tongue as easily and fluidly as any of Blingden 
stone’s deep gnome inhabitants, though the mercenary used the
sentence structure more common to the drow language and not the
inverted form favored by many of the gnomes.
	“Many svirfneblin mining parties have been assaulted, ” Firble
said, his tone verging on that of an accusation. “Svirfneblin parties
working west of Blingdenstone.”
	Jarlaxle smiled coyly and held his hands out wide. “Ched
Nasad?” he asked innocently, implicating the next nearest drow city.
	“Menzoberranzan!” Firble asserted. Ched Nasad was many
weeks away. “One dark elf wore the emblem of a Menzoberranzan
house.”
	“Rogue parties, ” Jarlaxle reasoned. “Young fighters out for plea 
sure.
	Firble’s thin lips almost disappeared with his ensuing scowl.
Both he and Jarlaxle knew better than to think that the raiding drow
were simple young rowdies. The attacks had been coordinated and
executed perfectly, and many svirffiebli had been slain.
	“What am I to say?” Jarlaxle asked innocently. “I am but a pawn
to the events about me.”
	Firble snorted.
	“I thank you for your confidence in my position, ” the merce 
nary said without missing a beat. “But, really, dear Firble, we have
been over this before. The events are quite out of my hands this
time.”
	“What events?” Firble demanded. He and Jarlaxle had met
twice before over the last two months, discussing this very issue, for
the drow activity near the svirfneblin city had increased dramati 
cally. At each meeting Jarlaxle had slyly eluded to some great
events, but never had he come out and actually told Firble anything.
	“Have we come to banter this same issue?” the mercenary
asked wearily. “Really, dear Firble, I grow tired of your, ”
	“A drow we have captured, ” Firble interrupted, crossing his
short but burly arms over his chest, as though that news should
carry some weight.
	Jarlaxle’s expression turned incredulous and he held his hands
out wide again, as if to ask, “So?”
	“We believe this drow is a native of Menzoberranzan, ” Firble
went on.
	“A female?” Jarlaxle asked, thinking that the gnome, apparently
viewing his information as vital, must be referring to a high priest 
ess. The mercenary hadn’t heard of any missing high priestesses
(except, of course, Jerlys Horlbar, and she wasn’t really missing).
	“A male, ” Firble replied, and again the mercenary’s expression
turned dubious.
	“Then execute him, ” the pragmatic Jarlaxle reasoned.
	Firble tightened his arms across his chest and began tap tapping
his foot impatiently on the stone.
	“Really, Firble, do you believe that a male drow prisoner gives
your city some bargaining power?” the mercenary asked. “Do you
expect me to run back to Menzoberranzan, pleading for this one
male? Do you expect that the ruling matron mothers will demand
that all activity in this area be ceased for his sake?”
	“Then you admit sanctioned activity in this area!” the svirf 
neblin retorted, pointing a stubby finger Jarlaxle’s way and thinking
he had caught the mercenary in a lie.
	“I speak merely hypothetically, ” Jarlaxle corrected. “I was
granting you your presumption so that I might correctly mirror
your intentions.”
	“My intentions you do not know, Jarlaxle, ” Firble assured. It
was clear to Jarlaxle, though, that the gnome was growing agitated
by the mercenary’s cool demeanor. It was always that way with Jar 
laxle. Firble met with the drow only when the situation was critical
to Blingdenstone, and often his meetings cost him dearly in precious
gems or other treasures.
	“Name your price, then, ” the gnome went on.
	“My price?”
	“Imperiled is my city, ” Firble said sharply. “And Jarlaxle knows
why!”
	The mercenary did not respond. He merely smiled and leaned
back from the gnome.
	“Jarlaxle knows, too, the name of this drow we have taken, ”
Firble went on, in turn trying to be sly. For the first time, the merce 
nary revealed, albeit briefly, his intrigue.
	Firble really hadn’t wanted to take the conversation this far. It
was not his intent to reveal the “prisoner’s” identity. Drizzt Do’Urden
was, after all, a friend of Belwar Dissengulp, the Most Honored Bur 
row Warden. Drizzt had never proven himself an enemy of Bling 
denstone, had even aided the svirfnebli a score of years before, 
when he first had passed through the city. And by all accounts, the
rogue drow had helped svirfnebli again on his return, out in the
tunnels against his drow kin.
	Still, Firble’s first loyalty was to his own people and his city, and
if giving Drizzt’s name to Jarlaxle might aid the gnomes in their cur 
rent predicament, might reveal the imposing events that Jarlaxle
kept hinting at, then, to Firble, it would be worth the price.
	Jarlaxle paused for a long while, trying to figure out where he
should take this suddenly meaningful conversation. He figured that
the drow was some rogue male, perhaps a former member of Bre 
gan D’aerthe presumed lost in the outer tunnels. Or maybe the
gnomes had bagged a noble from one of the higher ranking houses, 
a fine prize indeed. Jarlaxle’s ruby eyes gleamed at the thought of
the profits such a noble might bring to Bregan D’aerthe.
	“Has he a name?” the mercenary asked.
	“A name that is known to you, and to us, ” Firble replied, feeling
positively superior (a rare occurrence in his dealings with the crafty
mercenary).
	His cryptic answer, though, had given more information than
intended to Jarlaxle. Few drow were known by name to the gnomes
of Blingdenstone, and Jarlaxle could check on the whereabouts of
most of those few quite easily. The mercenary’s eyes widened sud 
denly, but he quickly regained his composure, his mind reeling
down the path of a new possibility.
	“Tell me of the events, ” Firble demanded. “Why are Menzober 
ranzan drow near Blingdenstone? Tell me, and to you I shall give
the name!”
	“Give the name if you choose, ” Jarlaxle scoffed. “The events? I
have already told you to look to Ched Nasad, or to playful young
males, students, perhaps, out of the Academy.”
	Firble hopped up and down, fists clenched in front of him as
though he meant to jump over and punch the unpredictable merce 
nary. All feelings that he had gained the upper hand washed away
in the blink of a drow eye.
	“Dear Firble, ” Jarlaxle cooed. “Really, we should not be meeting
unless we have more important matters to discuss. And, really, you
and your escort should not be so far from home, not in these dark
times.”
	The little svirfneblin let out an unintentional groan of frustra 
tion at the mercenary’s continued hints that something dire was
going on, that the increased drow activity was linked to some
greater design.
	But Jarlaxle, standing with one arm across his belly, his elbow in
his hand and his other hand propping his chin, remained impassive, 
seeming positively amused by it all. Firble would get no pertinent
information this day, he realized, so he gave a curt bow and spun
about, kicking stones every step of the way out of the chamber.
	The mercenary held his relaxed posture for some time after the
gnome had left, then casually lifted one hand and signaled to the
tunnel behind him. Out walked a human, though his eyes glowed
red with the infravision common to Underdark races, a gift from a
high priestess.
	“Did you find that amusing?” Jarlaxle asked in the surface
tongue.
	“And informative, ” Entreri replied. “When we get back to the
city, it should be a minor thing for you to discern the identity of the
captured drow.”
	Jarlaxle regarded the assassin curiously. “Do you not already
know it?” he asked.
	“I know of no missing nobles, ” Entreri replied, taking time as he
spoke to carefully study the mercenary. Had he missed something?
“Certainly, their prisoner must be a noble, since his name was
known not only to you, but to the gnomes. A noble or an adventur 
ous drow merchant.”
	“Suppose I told you that the drow in Blingdenstone was no
prisoner, ” Jarlaxle hinted, a wry smile on his ebon skinned face.
	Entreri stared at him blankly, apparently having no clue as to
what the mercenary was talking about.
	“Of cOurse, ” Jarlaxle said a moment later. “You do not know of
the past events, so you would have no way of putting the informa 
tion together. There was once a drow who left Menzoberranzan and
stopped, for a time, to live with the gnomes, though I hardly
expected that he would return.~~
	“You cannot be hinting that...” Entreri said, verily losing his
breath.
	“Precisely, ” Jarlaxle replied, turning his gaze to the tunnel
through which Firble had disappeared. “It seems that the fly has
come to the spiders.~~
	Entreri did not know what to think. Drizzt Do’Urden, back in
the Underdark! What did that mean for the planned raid on Mithril
Hall? Would the plans be dropped? Would Entreri’s last chance to
see the surface world be taken from him?
	“What are we to do?” he asked the mercenary, his tone hinting
at desperation.
	“Do?” Jarlaxle echoed. He leaned back and gave a hearty laugh.
	“Do?” the drow asked again, as though the thought was absurd.
“Why, we sit back and enjoy it, of course!”
	His response was not totally unexpected to Entreri, not when
the assassin took a moment to consider it. Jarlaxle was a lover of
ironies, that was why he thrived in the world of the chaotic drow, 
and this unexpected turn certainly qualified. To Jarlaxle, life was a
game, to be played and enjoyed without consideration for conse 
quences or morality.
	In other times, Entreri could empathize with that attitude, had
even adopted it on occasion, but not now. Too much hung in the bal 
ance for Artemis Entreri, for the poor, miserable assassin. Drizzt’s
presence so near Menzoberranzan raised important questions for
the assassin’s future, a future that looked bleak indeed.
	Jarlaxle laughed again, long and hard. Entreri stood solemnly, 
staring at the tunnel that led generally toward the gnome city, his
mind staring into the face, the violet eyes, of his most hated enemy.



	Drizzt took great comfort in the familiar surroundings about
him. He almost felt that he must be dreaming, for the small stone
dwelling was exactly as he remembered it, right down to the ham 
mock in which he now found himself.
	But Drizzt knew that this was no dream, knew it from the fact
that he could feel nothing from his waist down, neither the ham 
mock’s cords nor even a tingle in his bare feet.
	“Awake?” came a question from the dwelling’s second, smaller, 
chamber. The word struck Drizzt profoundly, for it was spoken in
the Svirfneblin tongue, that curious blend of elven melodies and
crackling dwarven consonants. Svirfneblin words rushed back to
Drizzt’s thoughts, though he had neither heard nor spoken the lan 
guage in more than twenty years. It took some effort for Drizzt to
turn his head and see the approaching burrow warden.
	The drow’s heart skipped a few beats at the sight.
	Belwar had aged a bit but still seemed sturdy. He banged his
“hands” together when he realized that Drizzt, his long ago friend, 
was indeed awake.
	Drizzt was pleased to see those hands, works of metallic art, 
capping the gnome’s arms. Drizzt’s own brother had cut off Bel 
war’s hands when Drizzt and Belwar had first met. There had been
a battle between the deep gnomes and a party of drow, and, at first, 
Drizzt had been Belwar’s prisoner. Dinin came fast to Drizzt’s aid, 
though, and the positions were quickly reversed.
	Dinin would have killed Belwar had it not been for Drizzt. But
Drizzt wasn’t sure how much his attempt to save the svirfneblin’s
life had been worth, for Dinin had ordered Belwar crippled. In the
brutal Underdark, crippled creatures usually did not survive long.
	When Drizzt had met Belwar again, when he had come into
Blingdenstone as a refugee from Menzoberranzan, he had found
that the svirfnebli, so unlike the drow, had come to their wounded
friend’s aid, crafting him apropos caps for his stubby arms. On the
right arm, the Most Honored Burrow Warden (as the deep gnomes
called Belwar) wore a mithril hammerhead etched with marvelous
runes and sketchings of powerful creatures, including an earth ele 
mental. The double headed pickaxe Belwar wore on his left arm
was no less spectacular. These were formidable tools for digging
and fighting, and more formidable still, for the svirfneblin shamans
had enchanted the “hands.” Drizzt had seen Belwar burrow
through solid stone as fast as a mole through soft dirt.
	It was so good to see that Belwar had continued to thrive, that
Drizzt’s first non drow friend, Drizzt’s first true friend, other than
Zak’nafein, was well.
	“Magga cammara, elf, ” the svirfneblin remarked with a chuckle
as he walked past the hammock. “I thought you would never wake
up!”
	Magga cammara, Drizzt’s mind echoed, “by the stones.” The
curious phrase, one that Drizzt had not heard in twenty years, put
the drow at ease, brought his thoughts cascading back to the peace 
ful time he had spent as Belwar ‘s guest in Blingdenstone.
	He came out of his personal thoughts and noticed that the svirf 
neblin was at his feet, studying his posture.
	“How do they feel?” Belwar asked.
	“They do not, ” Drizzt replied.
	The gnome nodded his hairless head and brought his pickaxe
up to scratch at his huge nose. “You got nookered, ” he remarked.
	Drizzt did not reply, obviously not understanding.
	“Nookered, ” Belwar said again, moving to a cabinet bolted to
the wall. He hooked the door with his pickaxe and swung it open, 
then used both hands to tentatively grasp some item inside and take
it out for Drizzt to see. “A newly designed weapon, ” Belwar
explained. “Been around for only a few years.
	Drizzt thought that the item resembled a beaver’s tail, with a
short handle for grasping on the narrow end and with the wide end
curled over at a sharp angle. It was smooth all about, with the
notable exception of one serrated edge.
	“A nooker, ” Belwar said, holding it up high. It slipped from his
tentative grasp and dropped to the floor.
	Belwar shrugged and clapped his mithril hands together. “A
good thing it is that I have my own weapons!” Belwar banged the
hammer and pickaxe together a second time.
	“Lucky you are, Drizzt Do’Urden, ” he went on, “that the svirf 
nebli in battle recognized you for a friend.”
	Drizzt snorted; he didn’t, at that moment, feel very lucky.
	“He could have hit you with the sharp edge, ” Belwar went on.
“Cut your backbone in half, it would have!”
	“My backbone feels as if it has been cut in half, ” Drizzt
remarked.
	“No, no, ” Belwar said, walking back to the bottom of the ham 
mock, “just nookered.” The gnome poked his pickaxe hard against
the bottom of Drizzt’s foot, and the drow winced and shifted. “See, 
coming back already is the feeling, ” Belwar declared, and, smiling
mischievously, he prodded Drizzt again.
	“I will walk again, Burrow Warden, ” the relieved drow
promised, his tone threatening so that he could play along with the
game.
	Belwar poked him again. “A while will that be!” he laughed.
“And soon you will feel a tickle as well!”
	It seemed like old times to Drizzt; it seemed like the very press 
ing problems that had burdened his shoulders had been temporar 
ily lifted. How good it was to see his old friend again, this gnome
who had gone out with him, out of loyalty alone, into the wilds of
the Underdark, who had been captured beside Drizzt by the
dreaded mind flayers and had fought his way out beside Drizzt.
	“It was a coincidence, fortunate for both me and your fellows in
the tunnels, that I happened into the area when I did, ” Drizzt said.
	“Not so much a chance of fate, ” Belwar replied, and a grim
demeanor clouded his cheerful expression. “The fights have become
too common. One a week, at least, and many svirfnebli have died.”
	Drizzt closed his lavender eyes and tried to digest the unwel 
come news.
	“Lloth is hungry, so it is said, ” Belwar went on, “and life has not
been good for the gnomes of Blingdenstone. The cause of it all we
are trying to learn.
	Drizzt took it all in stride, feeling then, more than ever before, 
that he had done right in returning. More was happening than a
simple drow attempt to recapture him. Belwar ‘s description, the
assertion that Lloth was hungry, seemed on the mark.
	Drizzt got prodded again, hard, and he popped open his eyes to
see the smiling burrow warden staring down at him, the cloud of
recent events apparently passed. “But enough of the darkness!” Bel 
war declared. “Twenty years we have to recall, you for me and me
for you!” He reached down and hooked one of Drizzt’s boots, lifting
it up and sniffing at the sole. “You found the surface?” he asked, sin 
cerely hopeful.
	The two friends spent the rest of that day trading tales, with
Drizzt, who had gone into so different a world, doing most of the
talking. Many times Belwar gasped and laughed; once he shared
tears with his drow friend, seeming sincerely hurt by the loss of
Wulfgar.
	Drizzt knew at that moment that he had rediscovered another of
his dearest friends. Belwar listened intently, with caring, to Drizzt’s
every word, let him share the most personal moments of his last
twenty years with the silent support of a true friend.
	After they dined that night, Drizzt took his first tentative steps, 
and Belwar, who had seen the debilitating effects of a well wielded
nooker before, assured the drow that he would be running along
rubble filled walls again in a day or so.
	That news came as a mixed blessing. Drizzt was glad that he
would heal, of course, but a small part of him wished that the
process would take longer, that he might extend his visit with Bel 
war. For Drizzt knew that, the moment his body was able, the time
would be at hand for him to finish his journey, to return to Menzo 
berranzan and try to end the threat.


Chapter 14

DISGUISE


	Wait here, Guen, ” Catti-brie whispered to the panther, 
both of whom stared at the wider area, a chamber rela 
tively clear of stalagmites, that loomed up ahead. Many
goblin voices came from that chamber. Catti-brie
guessed that this was the main host, probably growing nervous
since their scouting party hadn’t returned. Those few surviving gob 
lins were likely coming fast behind her, the young woman knew.
She and Guen had done a fine job in prodding them on their way, 
had sent them running in the opposite direction down the corridor, 
but they likely had already turned about. And that fight had
occurred less than an hour’s hike from this spot.
	There was no other apparent way around the chamber, and
Catti-brie understood without even seeing the goblin horde that
there were simply too many of the wretches to fight or scare off. She
looked down to her ebon skinned hands one last time, took some
comfort in their accurate drow appearance, then straightened her
thick hair, showing stark white now instead of its normal auburn, 
and plush robes, and defiantly strode forward.
	The closest goblin sentries fell back in terror as the drow priest 
ess casually entered their lair. Numbers alone kept the group from
running off altogether, for, as Catti-brie had guessed, more than a
hundred goblins were camped here. A dozen spears came up, 
angled in her direction, but she continued to walk steadily toward
the center of the cavern.
	Goblins gathered all around the young woman, cutting off any
retreat. Others crouched facing the tunnel from which Catti-brie had
emerged, not knowing if other drow would come strolling through.
Still, the sea of flesh parted before the unexpected visitor; Catti 
brie’s bravado and disguise had apparently put the creatures off
their collective guard.
	She reached the chamber’s halfway point, could see the corridor
continuing on across the way, but the sea closed around her, giving
ground more slowly and forcing the woman turned drow to slow
her pace as well.
	Then she was stopped, goblin spears pointing her way from
every direction, goblin whispers filling the room. “Gund ha, moga
moga, ” she demanded. Her command of the Goblin tongue was
rudimentary at best, and she wasn’t quite sure if she had said, 
"move aside and let me pass, " or "move my mother into the ditch.”
	She hoped it was the former.
	“Moga gund, geek ik moon’ga’woon’ga!” rasped one huge goblin, 
nearly as large as a man, and it shifted through the horde to stand
right before Catti-brie. The young woman forced herself to remain
calm, but a large part of her wanted to cry out for Guenhwyvar and
run away, and a smaller part wanted to break out in laughter. This
was obviously the goblin leader, or the tribe’s shaman, at least.
	But the creature needed a few fashion tips. It wore high black
boots, like those of a nobleman, but with the sides cut out to allow
for its wide, ducklike feet. A pair of women’s pantaloons, ringed
with wide frills, served as its breeches, and, though it was obviously
male, the beast wore a woman’s underpants and corset, as well, 
complete with cups for very ample breasts. Several mismatched
necklaces, some gold, some silver, and one strand of pearls, circled
its skinny neck, and a gaudy ring adorned every crooked finger.
Catti-brie recognized the goblin’s headdress as religious, though she
wasn’t quite certain of the sect. It resembled a sunburst trimmed
with long gold ribbons, but Catti-brie was fairly sure that the goblin
had it on backward, for it leaned forward over the ugly creature’s
sloping brow, one ribbon dangling annoyingly before the goblin’s
nose.
	No doubt, the goblin thought itself the height of thieving fash 
ion, dressed in the clothing of its tribe’s unfortunate victims. It con 
tinued to ramble in its high pitched voice, too fast for Catti-brie to
make out more than a single word here or there. Then the creature
stopped, abruptly, and pounded a fist against its chest.
	“Do ye speak the surface tongue?” Catti-brie asked, trying to
find some common ground. She fought hard to hold her nerve, but
expected a spear to plunge into her back at any moment.
	The goblin leader regarded her curiously, apparently not under 
standing a word she had said. It scanned the woman up and down, 
its red glowing eyes finally coming to rest on the locket that hung
about Catti-brie’s neck. “Nying so, wucka, ” it remarked, and it
pointed to the locket, then to Catti-brie, then swept its hand about to
indicate the far exit.
	Had the locket been a normal piece of jewelry, Catti-brie will 
ingly would have given it over in exchange for passage, but she
needed the magic item if she was to have any chance of locating
Drizzt. The goblin repeated its demand, its tone more urgent, and
the young woman knew that she had to think fast.
	On sudden inspiration, she smiled and stuck an upraised finger
before her. “Nying, ” she said, thinking that to be the goblin word for
gift. She clapped her hands sharply twice before her and called out, 
“Guenhwyvar!” without looking back over her shoulder.
	A startled cry from the goblins at the back end of the chamber
told her that the panther was on its way.
	“Come in with calm, Guen, ” Catti-brie called. “Walk to me side
without a fight.”
	The panther stalked slowly and steadily, head down and ears
flattened. Every so often, Guenhwyvar let out a low growl, just to
keep the closest goblins on their heels. The crowd parted widely, 
giving the magnificent cat a large open path to the drow priestess.
	Then Guenhwyvar was at Catti-brie’s side, nuzzling the
woman’s hip.
	“Nying, ” Catti-brie said again, pointing from the panther to the
goblin. “Ye take the cat and I walk out the passage, ” she added, 
motioning as best she could with her hands to convey the message.
The ugly goblin fashion king scratched its head, shifting the head 
piece awkwardly to the side.
	“Well, go over and make nice, ” Catti-brie whispered to Guen 
hwyvar. She pushed the cat away with her leg. The panther looked
up to her, seemed more than a little annoyed by it all, then padded
over to the goblin leader and plopped down at its feet (and the
blood drained from the monster’s face!).
	“Nying, ” Catti-brie said again, motioning that the goblin should
reach down and pet the cat. The creature eyed her incredulously, but
gradually, with her coaxing, the goblin mustered the nerve to touch
the cat’s thick fur.
	The goblin’s pointy toothed smile widened, and it dared to
touch the cat again, more solidly. Again it dipped, and again, and
each stroke went more firmly over the panther’s back. Through it
all, Guenhwyvar leveled a withering stare at Catti-brie.
	“Now, ye’re to stay here with this friendly goblin, ” Catti-brie
instructed the cat, making sure that her tones did not give away her
true meaning. She patted her belt pouch, the one holding the fig 
urine, and added, “I’ll be calling ye, don’t ye doubt.”
	Then Catti-brie straightened and faced the goblin leader
squarely. She slapped a hand against her chest, then snapped it
straight out and pointed to the far exit, her expression a scowl. “I
go!” she declared and took a step forward.
	At first, the goblin leader seemed as though it would move to
hinder her, but a quick glance to the powerful cat at its feet changed
the creature’s mind. Catti-brie had played the game perfectly; she
had allowed the overly proud goblin leader to retain its dignity, had
kept herself appearing as a potentially dangerous enemy, and had
strategically placed six hundred pounds of fighting ally right at the
goblin leader’s feet.
	“Nying so, wucka, ” the goblin said again, pointing to Guenhwy 
var, then to the far exit, and it gingerly stepped aside so that the
drow could pass.
	Catti-brie swept across the rest of the chamber, backhand slap 
ping one goblin that didn’t get far enough out of her path. The crea 
ture came right back at her, sword raised, but Catti-brie didn’t
flinch, and a cry from the goblin leader, still with the panther curled
about its ankles, stopped the goblin’s response.
	Catti-brie laughed in its ugly face, showed it that she held her
own dagger, a magnificent, jeweled thing, ready under the folds of
her beautiful robes.
	She made it to the narrower tunnel and continued walking
slowly for many steps. Then she stopped, glanced back, and pulled
out the panther figurine.
	Back in the chamber, the goblin leader was showing off its new
acquisition to the tribe, explaining how it had outsmarted a “stupid
drow female thing, ” and had taken the cat as its own. It didn’t mat 
ter that the other goblins had witnessed the whole affair; in goblin
culture, history was recreated almost daily.
	The leader’s smug smile waned quickly when a gray mist rose
up about the panther, and the cat’s material form began to melt
away.
	The goblin wailed a stream of protests and curses and dropped
to its knees to grab the fast fading cat.
	A huge paw shot out of the mist, hooked around the leader’s
head, and yanked the wretch in. Then there was only mist, the sur 
prised and not too smart goblin leader going along with the pan 
ther on a ride to the Astral Plane.
	The remaining goblins hooted and ran all about, bumping into
and falling over each other. Some thought to take up the chase for
the departing drow, but by the time they began to organize, Catti 
brie was long gone, running with all speed along the corridor and
thinking herself positively clever.
	The tunnels were familiar to him, too familiar. How many
times had young Drizzt Do’Urden traveled these ways, usually
serving as the point in a drow patrol? Then he had Guenhwyvar
with him; now he was alone.
	He limped slightly, one of his knees still a bit weak from the
svirfneblin nooker.
	He couldn’t use that as an excuse to remain in Blingdenstone
any longer, though. He knew that his business was pressing, and
Belwar, though the parting stung the burrow warden, had not
argued with Drizzt’s decision to be on his way, an indication to
Drizzt that the other svirfnebli wished him gone.
	That had been two days ago, two days and about fifty miles of
winding caverns. Drizzt had crossed the trails of at least three drow
patrols on his way, an unusually high number of warriors to be out
so far from Menzoberranzan, and that led credence to Belwar’s
claim that something dangerous was brewing, that the Spider
Queen was hungry. On all three of those occasions, Drizzt could
have tracked down the drow group and attempted to link up. He
thought of concocting some story that he was an emissary from a
merchant of Ched Nasad. All three times, Drizzt had lost his nerve, 
had kept moving instead toward Menzoberranzan, putting off that
fateful moment when he would make contact.
	Now the tunnels were too familiar, and that moment was nearly
upon him.
	He measured every step, maintaining perfect silence, as he
crossed into one wider way. He heard some noise up ahead, a
shuffle of many feet. Not drow feet, he knew; dark elves made no
noise.
	The ranger scaled the uneven wall and moved along a ledge
half a dozen feet up from the main floor. Sometimes he found him 
self grasping with fingertips and pulling himself forward, his feet
dangling, but Drizzt was not hindered, and he did not make a
sound.
	He froze in place at the din of more movement ahead. Fortu 
nately, the ledge widened once more, freeing his hands, and he gin 
gerly slipped his scimitars free of their sheaths, concentrating to
keep Twinkle from flaring with inner light.
	Slurping sounds led him around a bend, where he viewed a
host of short, huddled humanoids, wearing ragged cloaks with
cowls pulled over their faces. They spoke not at all, but milled about
aimlessly, and only their floppy feet showed Drizzt that they were
goblins.
	Goblin slaves, he knew by their movements, by their slumped
posture, for only slaves carried such a weight of broken resignation.
	Drizzt continued to watch silently for a while, trying to spot the
herding drow. There were at least four score goblins in this cavern, 
lining the edge of a small pond that the drow called Heldaeyn’s
Pool, scooping water up under their low pulled cowls as though
they had not drunk in many days.
	They probably had not. Drizzt spotted a couple of rothe, small
Underdark cattle, milling nearby, and he realized that this group
probably was out of the city in search of the missing creatures. On
such trips, slaves were given little or nothing to eat, though they
carried quite a bit of supplies. The accompanying drow guards, 
though, ate handsomely, usually right in front of their starving
slaves.
	The crack of a whip brought the goblins back to their feet and
shuffling back from the pool’s edge. Two drow soldiers, one male, 
one female, came into Drizzt’s view. They talked casually, the
female every so often cracking her whip.
	Another drow called out some commands from the other side of
the cavern, and the goblins began to fall into a rough line, more of
an elongated huddle than any organized formation.
	Drizzt knew that the most opportune moment was upon him.
Slavers were among the least organized and least regimented of
Menzoberranzan’s extracity bands. Any slaver contingent usually
comprised dark elves from several different houses and a comple 
ment of young drow students from each of the Academy’s three
schools.
	Drizzt quietly slipped down from the ledge and walked around
the jutting wall, flashing the customary hand signal greetings
(though his fingers felt awkward going through the intricate rou 
tine) to the drow in the cavern.
	The female pushed her male escort forward and stepped to the
side behind him. Immediately the male’s hand came up, holding
one of the typical drow hand crossbows, its dart coated, most likely, 
with a powerful sleeping potion.
	Who are you? the female’s hand asked over the male’s shoulder.
	“All that is left of a patrol group that ventured near Blingden 
stone, ” Drizzt answered.
	“You should go in near Tier Breche, then, ” the female answered
aloud. Hearing her voice, so typical of drow females, voices that
could be incredibly melodic or incredibly shrill, sent Drizzt’s
thoughts cascading back to those long years past. He realized then, 
fully, that he was just a few hundred yards from Menzoberranzan.
	“I do not wish to ‘go in’ at all, ” Drizzt answered. “At least, not
announced.” The reasoning made perfect sense, Drizzt knew. If he
had indeed been the only survivor of a lost patrol, he would have
been vigorously interrogated at the drow Academy, probably even
tortured until the masters were certain that he played no treacher 
ous role in the patrol’s fate, or until he died, whichever came first.
	“Who is the first house?” the female asked, her eyes locked on
Drizzt’s lavender glowing orbs.
	“Baenre, ” Drizzt answered immediately, expecting the test.
Spying dark elves from rival cities were not unknown in Menzober 
ranzan.
	“Their youngest son?” the female asked slyly. She curled her
lips up in a lewd and hungry smile, Drizzt realized as she continued
to stare deeply into his unusual eyes.
	By fortunate coincidence, Drizzt had attended the Academy in
the same class as House Baenre’s youngest son, as long as ancient
Matron Baenre had not reared another child in the three decades
Drizzt had been gone.
	“Berg’inyon, ” he answered confidently, dropping his hands in a
cocky cross at his belt (and putting them near his scimitars).
	“Who are you?” the female asked again, and she licked her lips, 
obviously intrigued.
	“No one who matters, ” Drizzt replied, and he matched her
smile and the intensity of her stare.
	The female patted her blocking male on the shoulder and her
fingers mOtioned for him to go.
	Am Ito be off this miserable duty? he responded silently with his
hands, a hopeful expression on his face.
	“The bol will take your place this day, ” the female purred, 
labeling Drizzt with the drow word that described something
mysterious or intriguing.
	The male smiled widely and moved to put his hand crossbow
away. Noticing that it was cocked and ready, and looking up to take
note that a whole herd of goblins stood nearby, he widened his
smile instead and lifted the weapon to fire.
	Drizzt offered no reaction, though it pained him to see even
goblins treated so miserably.
	“No, ” the female said, putting her hand over the male’s wrist.
She reached up and removed the dart from the hand crossbow, then
replaced it with another. “Yours would put the creature to sleep, ”
she explained, and she cackled in laughter.
	The male considered her for just a moment, then apparently
caught on. He took aim at a goblin loitering near the water’s edge
and fired. The goblin jerked as the small dart jabbed into its back. It
started to turn about, but toppled instead, into the pool.
	Drizzt gnawed at his lips, understanding, by the goblin’s futile
flopping, that the dart the female had supplied was coated with a
paralyzing potion, one that left the doomed creature fully conscious.
The goblin had little control of its limbs and would surely drown, 
and, worse, it would know its cruel fate. It managed to arch its back
enough so that its face came above the water level, but Drizzt knew
that it would tire long before the wicked potion expired.
	The male laughed heartily, replaced the hand crossbow in its
small holster, which lay diagonally across his lower chest, and
walked off down the tunnel to Drizzt’s left. Before he had gone even
a dozen steps, the female began cracking her whip and called for the
few drow guards to get the caravan moving, down the tunnel to the
right.
	After a moment, she turned a cold glare on Drizzt. “Why are
you standing there?” she demanded.
	Drizzt pointed to the goblin in the pool, floundering badly now, 
barely able to keep its mouth out of the water. He managed a laugh, 
as if he was enjoying the macabre spectacle, but he seriously consid 
ered rushing over and cutting the evil female down at that moment.
	All the way out of the small cavern, Drizzt looked for opportu 
nities to get over to the goblin, to pull the creature out of the water
so that it would have a chance to get away. The female drow never
stopped eyeing him, though, not for an instant, and Drizzt under 
stood that she had more on her mind than simply including him in
the slave caravan. After all, why hadn’t she taken the break when
the new slaver unexpectedly arrived?
	The dying goblin’s last splashes followed Drizzt out of that
place. The renegade drow swallowed hard and fought away his
revulsion. No matter how many times he witnessed it, he would
never get used to the brutality of his kin.
	And Drizzt was glad of that.


Chapter 15
MASKS


	Catti-brie had never seen such creatures. They somewhat
resembled gnomes, at least in stature, being about three
feet tall, but they had no hair on their lumpy, ruddy
heads, and their skin, in the starlight afforded her by
the magical circlet, showed grayish. They were quite stout, nearly as
muscular as dwarves, and judging from the fine tools they carried
and the well fitting metal armor they wore, they were, like dwarves, 
adept at mining and crafting.
	Drizzt had told Catti-brie of the svirfnebli, the deep gnomes, 
and that is what she presumed she was looking upon. She couldn’t
be sure, though, and was afraid that this might be some offshoot of
the evil duergar, gray dwarves.
	She crouched amid a cluster of tall, thin stalagmites in an area of
many crisscrossing corridors. The deep gnomes, if that’s what they
were, had come down the opposite way, and were now milling
about one wide, flat section of corridor, talking among themselves
and paying little heed of the stalagmite cluster twenty feet away.
	Catti-brie was not sure of how she should proceed. If these were
svirfnebli, and she was fairly sure of that, they could prove to be
valuable allies, but how might she approach them? They certainly
did not speak the same language and probably were as unfamiliar
with humans as she was with them.
	She decided that her best course would be simply to sit tight
and let the creatures pass. Catti-brie had never experienced the
strangeness of infravision, though, and she did not fully appreciate
that, sitting among the cool stalagmites, her body temperature fully
thirty degrees warmer than the stone, she was practically glowing
to the svirfnebli’s heat seeing eyes.
	Even as the young woman crouched and waited, deep gnomes
fanned out in the tunnels around her, trying to discern if this drow
(for Catti-brie still wore the magical mask) was alone or part of a
larger band. A few minutes slipped by; Catti-brie looked down to
her hand, thinking that she felt something in the stone, a slight
vibration, perhaps. The young woman continued to stare at her tin 
gling hand curiously. She did not know that deep gnomes commu 
nicated in a method that was part telepathy and part psychokinesis, 
sending their thought patterns to each other through the stone, and
that a sensitive hand could sense the vibrations.
	She did not know that the minute tingling was the confirmation
from the deep gnome scouts that this drow crouching in the stalag 
mite cluster was indeed alone.
	One of the svirfnebli ahead suddenly burst into motion, chant 
ing a few words that Catti-brie did not understand and hurling a
rock her way. She dipped lower behind the stones for cover and
tried to decide whether to call out a surrender or take out her bow
and try to frighten the creatures away.
	The stone bounced harmlessly short and shattered, its flecks
spreading in a small area before the stalagmite cluster. Those flecks
began to smoke and sizzle, and the ground began to tremble.
	Before Catti-brie knew what was happening, the stones before
her rose up like a gigantic bubble, then took on the shape of a giant
fifteen foot tall humanoid, its girth practically filling the corridor.
The creature had huge, rocky arms that could smash a building to
pieces. Two of the front stalagmites had been caught up in the mon 
strous formation and now served as dangerous spikes protruding
from the front of the monster’s massive chest.
	Down the passage, the deep gnomes let out battle cries, calls
that echoed in corridors all about the frightened woman.
	Catti-brie scrambled backward as a gigantic hand swooped in
and took the top from one stalagmite. She dropped the onyx figur 
ing and called frantically for Guenhwyvar, all the while fitting an
arrow to her bowstring.
	The earth elemental shifted forward, its bulky legs melding
with, slipping right through, the stony stalagmites in its way. It
moved again to grab the woman, but a silver streaking arrow
ripped through its rock face, blowing a clean crevice between the
monster’s eyes.
	The elemental straightened and reeled, then used its hands to
push its halved head back into one piece. It looked back to the clus 
ter and saw not the female drow, but a huge cat, tamping down its
hind legs.
	Catti-brie came out the back of the cluster, thinking to flee, but
found deep gnomes coming down every side passage. She ran along
the main corridor, cutting from mound to mound for cover, not dar 
ing to glance back at Guenhwyvar and the elemental. Then some 
thing hard banged against her shin, tripping her, and she sprawled
headlong. She squirmed about to see another of the svirfnebli rising
from behind one mound, a pickaxe still angled out as it had been
placed to trip her.
	Catti-brie pulled her bow around and shifted into a sitting posi 
tion, but the weapon was batted away. She instinctively rolled to the
side, but heard shuffling feet as three gnomes kept pace with her, 
heavy mauls lifted high to squash her.
	Guenhwyvar snarled and soared, thinking to fly right past the
behemoth and turn it about. The elemental was faster than the pan 
ther suspected, though, and a great rocky hand shot out, catching
the cat in midflight and pulling it to its massive chest. Guenhwyvar
shrieked as a stalagmite spike dug into a shoulder, and the deep
gnomes, running up beside their champion, shrieked as well, in glee
that the drow and her unexpected ally were apparently soon to be
finished.
	A maul descended toward Catti-brie’s head. She snapped out
her short sword and caught it at the joint between handle and head, 
deflecting it enough so that it banged loudly off the floor. The young
woman scampered and parried, trying to get far enough from the
gnomes to regain her footing, but they paced her, every which way, 
banging their mauls with shortened, measured strokes so that this
fast tiring dark elf had no opportunities for clear counterstrikes.
	The sight of the marvelous panther, soon to be fully impaled
and crushed, brought victorious thrills to a handful of the trailing
svirfnebli, but brought only confusion to two others. Those two, 
Seldig and Pumkato by name, had played with such a panther as
fledglings, and since Drizzt Do’Urden, the drow renegade they had
played beside almost thirty years before, had just passed through
Blingdenstone, they felt the panther’s appearance could not be
coincidence.
	“Guenhwyvar!” Seldig cried, and the panther roared in reply.
	The name, so perfectly spoken, struck Catti-brie profoundly and
made those three deep gnomes about her hesitate as well.
	Pumkato, who had summoned the elemental in the first place, 
called for the monster to hold steady, and Seldig quickly used his
pickaxe to scale partway up the behemoth. “Guenhwyvar?” he
asked, just a few feet from the panther’s face. The trapped cat’s ears
came up, and it put a plaintive look on the somewhat familiar
gnome.
	“Who is that?” Pumkato demanded, pointing to Catti-brie.
	Although she did not understand any of the svirfneblin’s
words, Catti-brie realized that she would never find a better oppor 
tunity. She dropped her sword to the stone, reached up with her free
hand and pulled off the magical mask, her features immediately
reverting to those of a young human woman. The three deep
gnomes near her cried out and fell back, regarding her with less 
than complimentary sour expressions, as though her new appear 
ance was quite ugly by their standards.
	Pumkato mustered the courage to shuffle over to her, and he
stood right in front of her.
	He had known one name, Catti-brie realized, and she hoped
that he would recognize another. She pointed to herself, then held
her arms out wide and pulled them in as if hugging someone.
“Drizzt Do’Urden?” she asked.
	Pumkato’s gray eyes widened, then he nodded, as though he
should not have been surprised. Hiding his disgust at the human’s
appearance, the gnome extended one hand and helped Catti-brie to
her feet.
	Catti-brie moved slowly, obviously, as she took out the figurine
and dismissed Guenhwyvar. Pumkato, likewise, sent his elemental
back into the stone.



	“Kolsen ‘shea orbb, ” Jarlaxle whispered, an arcane phrase rarely
uttered in Menzoberranzan that roughly translated to “pull the legs
off a spider.”
	The seemingly plain wall before the mercenary reacted to the
passwords. It shifted and twisted into a spiderweb, then rotated
outward, its strands tucked together, to leave a hole for the merce 
nary and his human escort to climb through.
	Even Jarlaxle, usually one step ahead of other drow, was some 
what surprised, pleasantly surprised, to find Triel Baenre waiting
for him in the small office beyond, the private chambers of Gromph
Baenre at Sorcere, the school of magic in the drow Academy. Jarlaxle
had hoped that Gromph would be about, to witness the return, but
Triel was an even better witness.
	Entreri came in behind the mercenary and wisely stayed behind
at the sight of volatile Triel. The assassin eyed the intriguing room, 
perpetually bathed in soft glowing bluish light, as was most of the
wizards’ tower. Parchments lay everywhere, on the desk, on the
three chairs, and on the floor. The walls were lined with shelves that
held dozens of large, capped bottles and smaller, hourglass shaped
containers, their tops off and with sealed packets lying next to them.
A hundred other curious items, too strange for the surface dweller
to even guess at what they might do, lay amid the jumble.
	“You bring colnbluth to Sorcere?” Triel remarked, her thin eye 
brows angling up in surprise.
	Entreri took care to keep his gaze to the floor, though he man 
aged a few peeks at the Baenre daughter. He hadn’t viewed Triel in
so strong a light before, and he thought now that she was not so
beautiful by drow standards. She was too short and too stocky in
the shoulders for her very angular facial features. It struck the assas 
sin as odd that Triel had risen so high among the ranks of drow, a
race that treasured physical beauty. Her station was testament to the
Baenre daughter’s power, he decided.
	Entreri couldn’t understand very much of the Drow tongue, 
though he realized that Triel probably had just insulted him. Nor 
mally, the assassin responded to insults with weapons, but not here, 
not so far from his element and not against this one. Jarlaxle had
warned Entreri about Triel a hundred times. She was looking for a
reason to kill him, the vicious Baenre daughter was always looking
for a reason to kill any colnbluth, and quite a few drow as well.
	“I bring him many places, ” Jarlaxle answered. “I did not think
that your brother would be here to protest.”
	Triel looked about the room, to the fabulous desk of polished
dwarf bones and the cushioned chair behind. There were no con 
necting rooms, no obvious hiding places, and no Gromph.
	“GrQmph must be here, ” Jarlaxle reasoned. “Else, why would
the matron mistress of Arach Tinilith be in this place? That is a vio 
lation of the rules, as I remember them, as serious a breach, at least, 
as my bringing a non drow to Sorcere.”
	“Take care how you question the actions of Triel Baenre, ” the
short priestess replied.
	“Asanque, ” Jarlaxle answered with a sweeping bow. It was a
somewhat ambiguous word that could mean either “as you wish, ”
or “likewise.”
	“Why are you here?” Triel demanded.
	“You knew I was coming, ” Jarlaxle stated.
	“Of course, ” Triel said slyly. “I know many things, but I wish to
hear your explanation for entering Sorcere, through private doors
reserved for headmasters, and into the private quarters of the city’s
archmage.”
	Jarlaxle reached into the folds of his black cloak and produced
the strange spider mask, the magical item that had gotten him over
House Baenre’s enchanted web fence. Triel’s ruby red eyes widened.
	“I was instructed by your mother to return this to Gromph, ” the
mercenary said, somewhat sourly.
	“Here?” Triel balked. “The mask belongs at House Baenre.”
	Jarlaxle couldn’t hide a bit of a smile, and he looked to Entreri, 
secretly hoping that the assassin was getting some of this conversa 
tion.
	“Gromph will retrieve it, ” Jarlaxle answered. He walked over to
the dwarf bone desk, uttered a word under his breath, and quickly
slipped the mask into a drawer, though Triel had begun to protest.
She stalked over to the desk and eyed the closed drawer suspi 
ciously Obviously Gromph would have trapped and warded it with
a secret password.
	“Open it, ” she instructed Jarlaxle. “I will hold the mask for
Gromph.”
	“I cannot, ” Jarlaxle lied. “The password changes with each use.
I was given only one.” Jarlaxle knew that he was playing a danger 
ous game here, but Triel and Gromph rarely spoke to each other, 
and Gromph, especially in these days, with all the preparations
going on in House Baenre, rarely visited his office at Sorcere. What
Jarlaxle needed now was to be rid of the mask, openly, so that it
could not be tied to him in any way That spider mask was the only
item, spells included, in all of Menzoberranzan that could get some 
one past House Baenre’s magical fence, and if events took the turns
that Jarlaxle suspected, that mask might soon be an important piece
of property, and evidence.
	Triel chanted softly and continued to stare at the closed drawer.
She recognized the intricate patterns of magical energy, glyphs and
wards, on the drawer, but they were woven too tightly for her to
easily unravel. Her magic was among the strongest in Menzober 
ranzan, but Triel feared to try her hand against her brother’s wiz 
ardly prowess. Dropping a threatening gaze at the cunning merce 
nary, she walked back across the room and stood near Entreri.
	“Look at me, ” she said in the Common tongue of the surface, 
which surprised the assassin, for very few drow in Menzoberranzan
spoke the language.
	Entreri lifted his gaze to peer into Triel’s intense eyes. He tried
to keep his demeanor calm, tried to appear subjugated, broken in
spirit, but Triel was too perceptive for such facades. She saw the
strength in the assassin, smiled as though she approved of it.
	“What do you know of all this?” she asked.
	“I know only what Jarlaxle tells me, ” Entreri replied, and he
dropped the facade and stared hard at Triel. If she wished a contest
of wills, then the assassin, who had survived and thrived on the
most dangerous streets of Faerun’s surface, would not back down.
	Triel matched the unblinking stare for a long while and became
convinced that she would garner little of use from this skilled adver 
sary “Be gone from here, ” she said to Jarlaxle, still using the surface
tongue.
	Jarlaxle rushed past the Baenre daughter and scooped up
Entreri in his wake. “Quickly, ” the mercenary remarked. “We
should be long out of Sorcere before Triel tries that drawer!” With
that, they were through the spidery door, which fast reverted to a
plain wall behind them, blocking Triel’s inevitable curses.
	But the Baenre daughter was not as mad as she was intrigued.
She recognized three courses coming together here, her own and her
mother’s, and now, apparently, Jarlaxle’s. The mercenary was up to
something, she knew, something that obviously included Artemis
Entreri.



	When they were safely away from Tier Breche and the Acad 
emy, Jarlaxle translated all that had transpired to Entreri.
	“You did not tell her of Drizzt’s impending arrival, ” the assassin
remarked. He had thought that important bit of information to be
the gist of Jarlaxle’s brief conversation with Triel, but the mercenary
said nothing about it now.
	“Triel has her own ways of discerning information, ” Jarlaxle
replied. “I do not wish to make her work easier, not without a clear
and agreed upon profit!”
	Entreri smiled, then bit his lower lip, digesting the mercenary’s
words. There was always so much going on in this infernal city, the
assassin mused. It was no wonder that Jarlaxle enjoyed the place so!
Entreri almost wished that he was a drow, that he could carve out a
place such as Jarlaxle had done, playing on the edge of disaster.
Almost.
	“When did Matron Baenre instruct you to return the mask?” the
assassin asked. He and Jarlaxle had been out of Menzoberranzan for
some time, had gone into the outer caverns to meet with a svirf 
neblin informant. They had returned only a short time before their
trip to Sorcere, and Jarlaxle, as far as Entreri knew, hadn’t gone any 
where near House Baenre.
	“Some time ago, ” Jarlaxle replied.
	“To bring it to the Academy?” Entreri pressed. It seemed out of
place to him. And why had Jarlaxle taken him along? He had never
been invited to that high place before, had even been refused on one
occasion, when he had asked to accompany Jarlaxle to Melee 
Magthere, the school of fighters. The mercenary had explained that
taking a colnbluth, a non drow, there would be risky, but now, for
some reason, Jarlaxle had thought it appropriate to take Entreri to
Sorcere, by far the more dangerous school.
	“She did not specify where the mask was to be returned, ” Jar 
laxle admitted.
	Entreri did not respond, though he realized the truth of that
answer. The spider mask was a prized possession of the Baenre clan, 
a potential weak spot in its hardened defenses. It belonged in the
secured quarters of House Baenre and nowhere else.
	“Foolish Triel, ” Jarlaxle remarked offhandedly. “The same
word, asanque, would get her into that drawer. She should know
that her brother was arrogant enough to believe that none would
ever try to steal from him, and so he would not spend too much
time with password tricks.”
	The mercenary laughed, and Entreri followed suit, though he
was more intrigued than amused. Jarlaxle rarely did or said any 
thing without purpose, and the mercenary had told him all of this
for a reason.
	But why?

Chapter 16
MENZOBERRANZAN

	The raft slid slowly across Donigarten, the small, dark
lake on the eastern end of the great cavern that housed
Menzoberranzan. Drizzt sat on the prow of the craft, 
looking west as the cavern opened wide before him, 
though, with his infravision, the image seemed strangely blurred.
Drizzt initially attributed it to the lake’s warm currents and gave it
little thought. He was preoccupied, his mind looking as much in the
past as in the present, reeling with stirring memories.
	The rhythmic moaning of the orcan paddlers behind him
allowed him to find a calmness, to flow his memories one at a time.
	The drow ranger closed his eyes and willed the shift from heat 
sensing infravision into the normal spectrum of light. He remem 
bered the splendor of Menzoberranzan’s stalagmite and stalactite
structures, their intricate and crafted designs highlighted by glow 
ing faerie fire of purple, blue, and red.
	He wasn’t prepared for what he found when he opened his
eyes. The city was filled with light! Not just with faerie fires, but
with sparkling dots of yellow and white, the light of torches and
bright magical enchantments. For a very brief moment, Drizzt
allowed himself to believe that the presence of light might be some
remote indication of a changing of the dark elves’ dark ways. He
had always connected the perpetual gloom of the Underdark to the
dark demeanor of drow, or, at least, had thought the darkness a fit 
ting result of his kin’s dark ways.
	Why the lights? Drizzt was not arrogant enough to think that
their presence might be somehow connected to the hunt for him. He
did not think that he was that important to the drow, and had little
more than the deep gnomes’ supposition that things were awry (He
had no idea that plans were being laid for an all out surface raid.)
He wanted to question one of the other drow on the matter, the
female, in particular, would likely have some information, but how
could he broach the subject without giving away his identity as an
outsider?
	As if on cue, the female was at his side, sitting uncomfortably
close.
	“The days are long on the Isle of Rothe, ” she said coyly, obvious
attraction reflected in her red glowing eyes.
	“1 will never get used to the light, ” Drizzt replied, changing the
subject and looking back toward the city. He kept his eyes operating
in the normal spectrum and hoped that his leading statements
might prompt some conversation on the matter. “It stings my eyes.”
	“Of course it does, ” the female purred, moving closer, even
Putting a hand inside Drizzt’s elbow. “But you will get used to it in
time.”
	In time? In time for what? Drizzt wanted to ask, for he suspected
from her tone that she was referring to some specific event. He had
no idea of how to begin the question, though, and, as the female
moved ever closer, he found that he had more pressing problems.
	In drow culture, males were subservient, and to refuse the
advances of a female could invite serious trouble. “1 am Khareesa, ”
she whispered in his ear. “Tell me that you wish to be my slave.”
	Drizzt jumped up suddenly and snapped his scimitars from
their sheaths. He turned away from Khareesa, focused his attention
on the lake to make sure that she understood he meant no threat
against her.
	“What is it?” the surprised female demanded.
	“A movement in the water, ” Drizzt lied. “A subtle undercur 
rent, as though something large just passed under our craft.” Kha 
reesa scowled but stood and peered into the gloomy lake. It was
common knowledge in Menzoberranzan that dark things resided
under the usually still waters of Donigarten. One of the games the
slavers played was to make the goblins and orcs swim from the isle
to the shore, to see if any of them would be pulled down to terrible
deaths.
	A few moments passed quietly, the only sound the continual
moaning chants of the orcs lining the sides of the raft.
	A third drow joined Drizzt and Khareesa on the prow, eyeing
Drizzt’s blue flaring scimitar. You mark us for every enemy in the area, 
his hands flashed in the silent code.
	Drizzt slid the scimitars away and let his eyes drift back into
infravision. If our enemies are beneath the waters, then the motion of our
craft marks us more than any light, his hands answered.
	“There are no enemies, ” Khareesa added, motioning for the
third drow to go back to his station. When he left, she turned a lewd
look upon Drizzt. “A warrior?” she asked, carefully regarding the
purple eyed male. “A patrol leader, perhaps?”
	Drizzt nodded and it was no lie; he had indeed been a patrol
leader.
	“Good, ” Khareesa remarked. “I like males who are worth the
trouble.” She looked up then, took note that they were fast approach 
ing the Isle of Rothe. “We will speak later, perhaps.” Then she
turned and swept away, brushing her hands behind her so that her
robes rode high on her shapely legs.
	Drizzt winced as though slapped. The last thing Khareesa had
on her mind was speaking. He couldn’t deny that she was beautiful, 
with sculpted features, a thick mane of well groomed hair, and a
finely toned body But in his years among the drow, Drizzt Do’Urden
had learned to look beyond physical beauty and physical attraction.
Drizzt did not separate the physical from the emotional. He was a
superb fighter because he fought with his heart and would no
sooner battle merely for the sake of battle than he would mate for
the sake of the physical act.
	“Later, ” Khareesa said once more, glancing back over her deli 
cate, perfectly squared shoulder.
	“When worms eat your bones, ” Drizzt whispered through a
phony smile. For some reason, he thought of Catti-brie then, and the
warmth of that image pushed away the chill of this hungry drow
female.



	Blingdenstone charmed Catti-brie, despite her obvious predica 
ment and the fact that the svirfnebli did not treat her as a long lost
friend. Stripped of her weapons, armor, jewelry, and even her boots, 
she was taken into the city in just her basic clothes. The gnome
escorts did not abuse her, but neither were they gentle. They tightly
clasped her arms at the elbows and hoisted her and pulled her
around the narrow, rocky ways of the city’s defensible anterooms.
	When they had taken the circlet from the woman’s head, the
gnomes had easily come to guess its function, and as soon as the
anterooms were past, they gave the precious item back to Catti-brie.
Drizzt had told her of this place, of the deep gnomes’ natural blend 
ing with their environment, but she had never pictured that the
drow’s words would ring so true. Dwarves were miners, the best in
all the world, but the deep gnomes went beyond that description.
They were part of the rock, it seemed, burrowing creatures wholly
at one with the stone. Their houses could have been the randomly
tumbled boulders of a long past volcanic eruption, their corridors, 
the winding ways of an ancient river.
	A hundred sets of eyes followed Catti-brie’s every step as she
was led across the city proper. She realized that she was probably
the first human the svirfnebli had ever seen, and she did not mind
the attention, for she was no less enchanted by the svirffiebli. Their
features, seeming so gray and dour out in the wild tunnels, appeared
softer now, gentler. She wondered what a smile would look like on
the face of a svirfneblin, and she wanted to see it. These were
Drizzt’s friends, she kept reminding herself, and she took comfort in
the drow ranger’s judgment.
	She was brought into a small, round room. A guard motioned
for her to sit in one of three stone chairs. Catti-brie did so hesitantly, 
for she recalled a tale that Drizzt had told her, of a svirfneblin chair
that had magically shackled him and held him fast.
	No such thing happened now, though, and a moment later, a
very unusual deep gnome entered the room, dangling the magical
locket with Drizzt’s picture from the end of a hand that was crafted
into a mithril pickaxe.
	“Belwar, ” Catti-brie stated, for there could not be two gnomes
who so perfectly fit Drizzt’s description of his dear svirfneblin
friend.
	The Most Honored Burrow Warden stopped in his tracks and
eyed the woman suspiciously, obviously caught off guard by her
recognition.
	“Drizzt... Belwar, ” Catti-brie said, again wrapping her arms
about her, as though hugging someone. She pointed to herself and
said, “Catti-brie... Drizzt, ” and repeated the motion.
	They could not speak two words of each other’s language, but, 
in a short time, using hand and body language, Catti-brie had won
over the burrow warden, had even explained to him that she was
searching for Drizzt.
	She did not like the grave face Belwar wore at that remark, and
his explanation, a single common name, the name of a drow city, 
was not reassuring; Drizzt had gone into Menzoberranzan.
	She was given a meal of cooked mushrooms and other plantlike
growths that she did not recognize, then she was given back her
items, including the locket and the onyx panther, but not the magi 
cal mask.
	She then was left alone, for hours it seemed, sitting in the starlit
darkness, silently blessing Alustriel for her precious gift and think 
ing how perfectly miserable the trek would have been without the
Cat’s Eye. She would not even have seen Belwar to recognize him!
	Her thoughts were still on Belwar when he at last returned, 
along with two other gnomes wearing long, soft robes, very unlike
the rough, leatherlike, metal plated outfits typical of the race. Catti 
brie figured that these two must be important, perhaps councilors.
	“Firble, ” Belwar explained, pointing to one of the svirfnebli, one
that did not look happy.
	Catti-brie figured out why a moment later, when Belwar pointed
to her, then to Firble, then to the door and spoke a long sentence, the
only word of which Catti-brie caught was, “Menzoberranzan.”
	Firble motioned for her to follow him, apparently anxious to be
on their way, and Catti-brie, though she would have loved to stay in
Blingdenstone and learn more about the intriguing svirfnebli, thor 
oughly agreed. Drizzt was too far ahead of her already. She rose
from the chair and started out, but was caught at the arm by Bel 
war’s pickaxe hand and turned about to face the burrow warden.
	He pulled the magical mask from his belt and lifted it to her.
“Drizzt, ” he said, pointing his hammer hand at her face. “Drizzt.”
	Catti-brie nodded, understanding that the burrow warden
thought it would be wise of her to walk as a drow. She turned to
leave, but, on a sudden impulse, turned back and gave Belwar a
peck on the cheek. Smiling appreciatively, the young woman
walked from the house, and, with Firble leading the way, strode
from Blingdenstone.
	“How did you get Firble to agree to take her into the drow
city?” the remaining gnome councilor asked the burrow warden
when they were alone.
	“Bivrip!” Belwar bellowed. He clapped his mithril hands
together and immediately sparks and arcing lines of energy ran
along his crafted hands. He put a wry look on the councilor, who
merely laughed in a squeaky svirfneblin way Poor Firble.



	Drizzt was glad to escort a group of orcs from the isle back to
the mainland, if only so that he could avoid the eager Khareesa. She
watched him go from the shore, her expression caught somewhere
between a pout and anticipation, as if to say that Drizzt might have
escaped, but only for now.
	With the isle behind him, Drizzt put all thoughts of Khareesa
from his mind. His task, and dangers, lay ahead, in the city proper, 
and he honestly did not know where he would begin looking for
answers. He feared that it would all come down to his surrender, 
that he would have to give himself over to protect the friends that
he had left behind.
	He thought of Zak’nafein, his father and friend, who had been
sacrificed to the evil Spider Queen in his stead. He thought of Wulf 
gar, his lost friend, and memories of the young barbarian strength 
ened Drizzt’s resolve.
	He offered no explanation to the surprised slavers awaiting the
craft on the beach. His expression alone told them not to question
him as he walked past their encampment, away from Donigarten.
	Soon he moved easily, warily, along the winding ways of Men 
zoberranzan. He passed close by several dark elves, under the
more than curious eyes of dozens of house guards, standing watch
from their parapets along the sides of hollowed stalactites. Drizzt
carried with him an irrational notion that he might be recognized, 
and had to tell himself many times that he had been out of Menzo 
berranzan for more than thirty years, that Drizzt Do’Urden, even
House Do’Urden, was now part of Menzoberranzan’s history.
	But, if that were true, why was he here, in this place where he
did not want to be?
	Drizzt wished that he had a piwafwi, the black cloak typical of
drow outerwear. His forest green cloak, thick and warm, was more
suited to the environs of the surface world and might connect him, 
in the eyes of onlookers, to that rarely seen place. He kept the hood
up, the cowl low, and pushed on. This would be one of many excur 
sions into the city proper, he believed, as he familiarized himself
once more with the winding avenues and the dark ways.
	The flicker of light around a bend surprised him, stung his heat 
seeing eyes, and he moved tightly against the wall of a stalagmite, 
one hand under his cloak, grasping Twinkle’s hilt.
	A group of four drow males came around the bend, talking eas 
ily, paying Drizzt no heed. They wore the symbol of House Baenre, 
Drizzt noted as his vision shifted back to the normal spectrum, and
one of them carried a torch!
	Little that Drizzt had witnessed in all his life seemed so out of
place to him. Why? he asked himself repeatedly, and he felt that
this all was somehow related to him. Were the drow preparing an
offensive against some surface location?
	The notion rocked Drizzt to his core. House Baenre soldiers car 
rying torches, getting their Underdark eyes desensitized to the light.
Drizzt did not know what to think. He would have to go back to the
Isle of Rothe, he decided, and he figured that that out of the way
place was as good a base as any he could secure in the city Perhaps
he could get Khareesa to tell him the meaning of the lights, so that
the next excursion into the city proper might prove fruitful.
	He stalked back through the city, cowl low, thoughts inward, 
and did not notice the movements shadowing his own; few in Men 
zoberranzan ever noticed the movements of Bregan D’aerthe.



	Catti-brie had never viewed anything so mysterious and won 
derful and, in the starlight of her vision, the glow of the stalagmite
towers and hanging stalactites seemed more wonderful still. The
faerie fires of Menzoberranzan highlighted ten thousand wondrous
carvings, some of definite shape (mostly spiders), and others free 
flowing forms, surrealistic and beautiful. She would like to come
here under different circumstances, Catti-brie decided. She would
like to be an explorer that discovered an empty Menzoberranzan, 
that she might study and absorb the incredible drow workmanship
and relics in safety
	For, as overwhelmed as Catti-brie was by the magnificence of
the drow city, she was truly terrified. Twenty thousand drow, 
twenty thousand deadly enemies, were all about her.
	As proof against the fear, the young woman tightly clasped
Alustriel’s magic locket and thought of the picture therein, of Drizzt
Do’Urden. He was here, somewhere close, she believed, and her
suspicions were confirmed when the locket flared suddenly with
warmth.
	Then it cooled. Catti-brie moved methodically, turning back to
the north, to the secret tunnels Firble had taken her through to get to
this place. The locket remained cool. She shifted to her right and
faced west, across the chasm near her, the Clawrift, it was called, 
and past the great, sweeping steppes that led to a higher level. Then
she faced south, toward the highest and grandest section of all, 
judging from the elaborate, glowing designs. Still the locket
remained cool, then began to warm as the young woman continued
to turn, looking past the nearest stalagmite mounds to the relatively
clear section in the east.
	Drizzt was there, in the east. Catti-brie took a deep breath then
another, to steady her nerves and muster the courage to come fully
out of the protected tunnel. She looked to her hands again, and her
flowing robes, and took comfort in the apparently perfect drow dis 
guise. She wished that she had Guenhwyvar beside her, remem 
bered the moment in Silverymoon when the panther had loped
down the streets beside her, but wasn’t sure how the cat would be
received in Menzoberranzan. The last thing she wanted to do was
call attention to herself.
	She moved quickly and quietly, throwing the hood of her robes
low over her head. She hunched as she walked, and kept her grasp
on the locket to guide her way and bolster her strength. She worked
hard to avoid the stares of the many house sentries, and pointedly
looked away whenever she saw a drow coming down the avenue
toward her from the other direction.
	She was almost past the area of stalagmites, could see the moss
bed, the mushroom grove, even the lake beyond, when two drow
came out of the shadows suddenly, blocking the way, though their
weapons remained sheathed.
	One of them asked her a question, which she, of course, did not
understand. She subconsciously winced and noticed that they were
looking at her eyes. Her eyes! Of course, they were not glowing with
infravision, as the deep gnomes had informed her. The male asked
his question again, somewhat more forcefully, then looked over his
shoulder, toward the moss bed and the lake.
	Catti-brie suspected that these two were part of a patrol, and
that they wanted to know what business she might have on this side
of the city. She noted the courteous way they addressed her, and
remembered those things that Drizzt had taught her about drow
culture.
	She was a female; they, only males.
	The undecipherable question came again, and Catti-brie
responded with an open snarl. One of the males dropped his hands
to the hilts of his twin swords, but Catti-brie pointed at them and
snarled again, viciously
	The two males looked to each other in obvious confusion. By
their estimation, this female was blind, or at least was not using
infravision, and the lights in the city were not that bright. She
should not have been able to see the movement clearly, and yet, by
her pointing finger, she obviously had.
	Catti-brie growled at them and waved them away, and to her
surprise (and profound relief), the males backed off, eyeing her sus 
piciously but making no moves against her.
	She started to hunch over, thinking to hide again under her
cowl, but changed her mind instead. This was Menzoberranzan, full
of brash dark elves, full of intrigue, a place where knowing, even
pretending to know, something your rival did not know could keep
you alive.
	Catti-brie threw off the hood and stood straight, shaking her
head as her thick hair freed itself of the folds. She stared at the two
males wickedly and began to laugh.
	They ran off.
	The young woman nearly toppled with relief. She took another
deep breath, clasped the locket in a clenched fist, and headed
toward the lake.

Chapter 17

EPITOME OF ENEMIES


	Do you know who he is? the drow soldier’s fingers asked
imperatively in the intricate hand code.
	Khareesa rocked back on her heels, not quite under 
standing any of this. A contingent of well armed drow
had come to the Isle of Rothe, demanding answers, interrogating
both the orc and goblin slaves and the few drow slavers on the
island. They wore no house emblems and, as far as Khareesa could
tell, were exclusively males.
	That did not stop them from treating her roughly, though, with 
out the proper protocol typically afforded her gender.
	“Do you?” the drow asked aloud. The unexpected noise brought
two of the male’s comrades rushing to his sides.
	“He is gone, ” the male explained to calm his companions, “into
the city.”
	But he is on his way back, a fourth drow replied in the silent hand
code as he rushed to join the others. We just received the code flashes
from the shore.
	The heightening intrigue was more than curious Khareesa could
take. “1 am Khareesa H’kar, ” she proclaimed, naming herself a noble
of one of the city’s lesser houses, but a noble nonetheless. “Who is
this male you speak of? And why is he so important?”
	The four males looked to each other slyly, and the newcomer
turned an evil glare on Khareesa.
	“You have heard of Daermon N’a’shezbaernon?” he asked
softly.
	Khareesa nodded. Of course she had heard of the powerful
house, House Do’Urden by its more common name. It had once been
the eighth ranked house in all the city, but had met a disastrous end.
	“Of their secondboy?” the male went on.
	Khareesa pursed her lips, unsure. She tried to remember the
tragic story of House Do’Urden, something about a renegade, when
another of the males jogged her memory.
	“Drizzt Do’Urden, ” he said.
	Khareesa started to nod, she had heard the name before, in
passing, then her eyes went wide as she realized the significance of
the handsome, purple eyed drow that had left the Isle of Rothe.
	She is a witness, one of the males reasoned.
She was not, argued another, until we told her the renegade’s name.
	“But now she is, ” said the first, and they looked in unison at the
female.
	Khareesa had long caught on to their wicked game and was
steadily backing away from them, sword and whip in hand. She
stopped as she felt the tip of yet another sword gently prod her fine
armor from behind, and she held her hands out wide.
	“House H’kar, ” she began, but abruptly ended as the drow
behind her plunged his fabulous drow made sword through the
fine armor and through a kidney. Khareesa jerked as the male
yanked the weapon back out. She slumped to one knee, trying to
hold her concentration against the sudden assault of agony, trying
to hold fast to her weapons.
	The four soldiers fell over her. There could be no witnesses.



	Drizzt’s gaze remained toward the strangely lighted city as the
raft slipped slowly across Donigarten’s dark waters.
	Torches? The thought hung heavily in his mind, for he had
pretty much convinced himself that the drow were preparing a
huge excursion to the surface. Why else would they be stinging
their sensitive eyes so?
	As the raft floated across the weedy bay of the Isle of Rothe, 
Drizzt noticed that no other craft were docked at the island. He gave
it little thought as he climbed over the prow and sprang lightly to
the mossy beach. The orcs had barely put up their oars when
another drow whisked past Drizzt and sprang into the boat, order 
ing the slave crew to put back out for the mainland.
	Orc rothe herders congregated by the shore, each squatting in
the mossy muck, ragged cloaks pulled tight. This was not unusual, 
for there was really little for them to do. The isle was not large, 
barely a hundred yards long and less than that in width, but it was
incredibly thick with low vegetation, mainly mosses and fungi. The
landscape was broken, filled with valleys and steep sloping
hillocks, and the biggest job facing the orcs, aside from taking rothe
from the isle to the mainland and chasing down strays, was simply
to make sure that none of the herd fell into any ravines.
	So the slaves sat down by the shore, silent and brooding. They
seemed somewhat edgy to Drizzt, but, consumed by his fears over
what was happening in the city, he again gave it little thought. He
did glance about to the drow slaver posts, and took comfort in the
fact that all the dark elves were apparently in place, standing quietly
and calmly. The Isle of Rothe was not an eventful place.
	Drizzt headed straight inland, away from the small bay and
toward the highest point on the island. Here stood the isle’s lone
structure, a small, two chambered house constructed of gigantic
mushroom stalks. He considered his strategy as he moved, thought
of how he might get the necessary information from Khareesa
without open confrontation. Events seemed to be moving quickly
about him, though, and he resolved that if he had to use his scimi 
tars to “convince” her, he would.
	Barely ten feet from the structure’s door, Drizzt stopped and
watched as the portal gently swung in. A drow soldier stepped to
the threshold and casually tossed Khareesa’s severed head at
Drizzt’s feet.
	“There is no way off the island, Drizzt Do’Urden, ” the drow
remarked.
	Drizzt didn’t turn his head, but shifted his eyes, trying to get a
clear measure of his surroundings. He inconspicuously worked one
toe under the soft moss, burying his foot to the ankle.
	“I’ll accept your surrender, ” the drow went on. “You cannot, ”
	The drow stopped abruptly as a wad of moss flew at his face.
He snapped out his sword and instinctively threw his hands up
before him in defense.
	Drizzt’s charge followed the moss divot. The ranger sprang
across the ten feet to his enemy, then dropped in a deceptive spin, 
pivoting on one planted knee. Using his momentum, Drizzt sent
Twinkle in a wicked, low cut that caught the surprised drow on the
side of the knee. The drow turned a complete somersault over that
stinging hit, striking the soft ground with a thud and a cry of pain as
he clutched at his ripped leg.
	Drizzt sensed that other dark elves were in the house behind
this one, so he was up and running quickly, around the structure
and out of sight of the door, then down the hillock’s steep back
slope. He dove, skidded, and rolled to build momentum, his
thoughts a jumble, his desperation mounting.
	Several dozen rothe milled about the mossy bank, and they
bleated and grunted as Drizzt scrambled among them. Drizzt heard
several clicks behind him, heard a hand crossbow quarrel slap into
one rothe. The creature tumbled, asleep before it hit the ground.
	Drizzt kept low, scrambling, trying to figure where he could
run. He had been on the island only a short time, had never been
here in his earlier years in the city, and wasn’t familiar with its land 
scape. He knew that this hillock dropped into a steep ravine, 
though, and thought that was his best chance.
	More shots came from behind; a javelin joined the quarrels.
Muck and divots flew wildly as the rothe, frightened by the rushing
dark elf and missiles, kicked about, threatening to stampede. They
were not large creatures, only three feet high at the shoulder, but
were solidly built. If caught on his hands and knees in the midst of a
rothe stampede, Drizzt knew he would be crushed.
	His problems compounded as he neared the back of the rothe
herd, for between the legs of one creature he spotted boots. Hardly
thinking, Drizzt lifted his shoulder and barreled sidelong into the
rothe, pushing it down the slope, into his enemy. One scimitar went
up high and sang as it struck a descending sword; another scimitar
jabbed low, under the rothe’s belly, but the enemy drow hopped
back, out of range.
	Drizzt coiled his legs under him and heaved with all his
strength, using the ground’s fairly steep angle to his advantage. The
rothe lifted off the ground and skipped sidelong, slamming the
drow. He was agile enough to lift a leg over the creature’s low back
and come cleanly over it, spinning about in an attempt to face Drizzt
squarely. But Drizzt was nowhere to be seen.
	A bleat to the side was the only warning the drow got as the
fierce ranger rushed in, scimitars flashing. The surprised drow
threw both his swords out in front as he spun about, barely deflect 
ing the scimitar cuts. One foot skidded out from under him, but he
came back up quickly, fire in his eyes and his swords thrusting
wildly, holding Drizzt at bay.
	Drizzt moved quickly to the right, gained the higher ground
again, though he knew that that move would put his back to the
archers at the top of the hillock. He kept his scimitars moving, his
eyes focused ahead, but listened to sounds from the back.
	A sword darted in low, was caught by Twinkle and held down.
A second thrust came in parallel to the first but a bit higher, and
Drizzt’s second scimitar responded, coming unexpectedly straight
across, angling the drow’s sword right for Drizzt’s low arm.
	Drizzt heard a slight whistle behind him.
	The enemy drow flashed a wicked grin, thinking he was about
to score a hit as the blades flashed across, but Drizzt sent Twinkle in
motion as well, equally fast, taking the drow’s sword arm with him
in the wide flying move. Drizzt swept the scimitars under and up, 
using their curving blades to keep the swords moving in line. He
turned a complete circuit, moving the blades high above his head
and moving himself one step to the side of the enemy drow.
	His trust in the unseen archer’s skill was not misplaced, and his
melee opponent jerked his hips to the side in a frantic effort to
dodge the javelin. He took a stinging hit and grimaced in pain.
	Drizzt heaved him away, sent him skidding down the slope.
The drow caught his balance as the ranger descended over him in a
wild rush.
	Scimitar batted sword again and again and again. Drizzt’s sec 
ond scimitar worked a more direct and devious pattern, thrusting
and angling for the drow’s belly.
	The wounded drow’s parries were impressive against the
onslaught, but with one leg numb from pain, he was backing up and
inevitably building momentum. He managed to glance back and
noticed one spur of stone rising above the ledge of the twenty foot
sheer drop. He thought to make for that spur and put his back
against it for support. His allies were rushing down the slope; they
would be beside him in a matter of seconds.
	Seconds he didn’t have.
	Both scimitars came in rapid succession, beating against the
steel of the drow’s swords, forcing him down the hill. Near the
drop, Drizzt launched his weapons simultaneously, side by side, in
crossing cuts, turning the tips of his enemy’s swords. Then Drizzt
launched himself, slamming against the drow’s chest, knocking him
off balance to crash against the rocky spur. Explosions went off in
the dazed drow’s head. He slumped to the moss, knowing that this
renegade, Drizzt Do’Urden, and his wicked scimitars would be
right behind..
	Drizzt hadn’t the time or the desire to complete the kill. Before
the drow finished collapsing, Drizzt had leaped over the ledge, hop 
ing to find moss and not sharp rocks, below.
	What he found was mud, and he hit with a splash, turning an
ankle, then turning a somersault. He finally hauled himself out and
ran off as fast as he could, zigzagging around stalagmite pillars, 
keeping low to the cover of the mounds, for he expected that the
archers would soon be at the ledge.
	Enemies were all about him, and very close, he realized, seeing
a form paralleling him along a stalagmite row to his right. Drizzt
went behind one mound and, instead of coming out the other side, 
veered to meet his enemy head on. He dropped to his knees as he
came behind the second mound, slashing across low in the expecta 
tion that his enemy would be back there.
	Twinkle hit a low riding sword this time. Drizzt had not gained
surprise, not with his maneuver, at least, but the drow was certainly
off guard, his second sword high for a strike, when Drizzt snapped
his second scimitar straight up, quicker than his enemy could antici 
pate. The pointed tip punctured the drow’s diaphragm, and though
Drizzt, as he continued his slide, could not extend his arm enough
to complete the move, the drow fell back against the stalagmite, out
of the fight.
	An ally was right behind him, though, and this soldier fell upon
the kneeling Drizzt with abandon, swords hacking fiercely.
	Pure instinct kept the darting blades from Drizzt as the ranger
worked his scimitars over his head, feeling more than seeing his
opponent’s moves. Understanding his sudden disadvantage, Drizzt
called upon his innate magic and summoned a globe of darkness
over himself and his enemy.
	Ringing steel continued to sound, weapons meeting and slid 
ing, with both combatants taking nicks. Drizzt growled and
increased his intensity, parrying and countering, still slashing up
oYer his head. Gradually, the skilled ranger shifted his weight to get
one foot under him.
	The enemy drow came with a sudden and fierce double chop, 
and nearly fell over when his blades caught nothing but air. He
spun immediately, whipping his swords across, and nearly lost
both blades as they slammed the side of the stony stalagmite
mound.
	In the heat of battle, he had forgotten the layout of the immedi 
ate area, forgotten the mound not so far away. The drow had heard
the reputation of Drizzt Do’Urden and suddenly understood the
magnitude of his mistake.
	Drizzt, perched high on a rounded shoulder of the mound, 
winced as he heard the swords connect with stone below him, tak 
ing little satisfaction in this action. He couldn’t see Twinkle’s flaring
blue light as the scimitar descended through the darkness globe.
	He ran free a moment later, his ankle still sore but supporting
him. He came out the back side of the ravine and moved up on the
ledge opposite the high hillock. The ledge ran toward the more
remote eastern end of the isle. There lay a lagoon, Drizzt believed, 
not so far away, and if he could reach it, he intended to dive right in.
Damn the legends of monsters in the water; the enemies about him
were all too real!



	Catti-brie heard the continuing scuffles from the isle. The
sounds drifted clearly across the still, dark waters of Donigarten.
From behind the stalk of one mushroom, she called up Guenhwyvar
and ran off as the mist took its solid form.
	By the lake, the young woman, still not confident of her drow
disguise, avoided the few dark elves that were about and motioned
to a nearby orc instead. Then she motioned to a boat, trying to indi 
cate that the creature should take her out to the isle. The orc seemed
nervous, or at least confused. It turned away and started to walk off.
	Catti-brie punched it in the back of the head.
	Cowering, obviously terrified, it turned about to face her. Catti 
brie shoved it toward the small boat, and this time the creature got
in and took up a paddle.
	Before she could join the orc, Catti-brie was intercepted by a
male drow, his strong hand closing tightly over her elbow.
	She eyed him dangerously and growled, trying to bluff once
again, but this determined dark elf was not taking the bait. In his
free hand he held a dagger, poised below Catti-brie’s elbow, just
inches from her ribs.
	“Be gone!” he said. “Bregan D’aerthe tells you to be gone!”
	Catti-brie didn’t understand a word of it, but her enemy’s con 
fusion was at least equal to hers as six hundred pounds of black fur
flew past, taking the surprised male on a splashing ride many feet
from the boat.
	Catti-brie turned fiercely on the orc, who pretended not to see a
thing and began paddling frantically. The young woman looked
back to the shore a moment later, fearful that Guenhwyvar would be
left behind and would have to swim the entire distance.
	A huge splash beside the boat (nearly overturning it) told her
differently, and the panther was now the one leading.
	It was simply too much for the terrified orc to take. The pitiful
creature shrieked and leaped for the water, swimming desperately
for the shore. Catti-brie took up the paddle and never looked back.



	The ledge was open to both sides at first, and Drizzt heard the
hiss of crossbow quarrels cutting the air over his head and just
behind him. Fortunately for Drizzt, the firing drow were back across
the ravine, at the base of the tall hillock, and hand crossbows were
not very accurate at long range.
	Drizzt wasn’t surprised when his running form began to glow
in purplish hues, tiny faerie fires igniting along his arms and legs, 
not burning, but marking him clearly to his enemies.
	He felt a sting in his left shoulder and quickly reached over and
popped out the small quarrel. The wound was only superficial, the
dart’s momentum mostly stalled by the dwarf crafted mithril chain
mail that Drizzt wore. He ran on, and could only hope that not
enough poison had entered his blood to tire him.
	The ledge veered to the right, putting Drizzt’s back to his ene 
mies. He felt even more vulnerable then, for just a moment, but soon
realized that the turn might be a good thing, putting more distance
between him and the stinging crossbows. Soon after, as the quarrels
bounced harmlessly behind him, the ledge veered again, back to the
left, going around the base of another hillock.
	This put the lapping waters of Donigarten at Drizzt’s right, a
dozen feet below him. He thought of sheathing his blades and
jumping in right there, but too many jagged mounds protruded
from the water for him to chance it.
	The ledge remained mostly open on his right as he sped along, 
the drop sporadically blocked by only a few anchoring stalagmites.
The hillock loomed on Drizzt’s left, fully protecting him from the
distant archers . . . but not from nearer enemies, he realized. As he
came around a slight bend, he discovered at the last instant that
beyond the bend lay a hollow, and in the hollow waited an enemy.
	The soldier leaped out into Drizzt’s path, sword and dirk waving.
	A scimitar turned the sword aside, and Drizzt thrust straight
ahead, knowing his second weapon would be intercepted by the
dirk. When the weapons predictably locked, Drizzt used his
momentum to push the dirk out wide and lifted one knee to collide
heavily with the drow’s belly.
	Drizzt clapped his wide spread hands together, simultaneously
snapping his scimitar hilts against his enemy’s face. He snapped his
weapons back out immediately, fearing that either the sword or
dagger would dive at him, but his opponent was past retaliation.
The evil drow fell straight to the ground, unconscious, and Drizzt
plowed over him and kept on going.
	The ranger had hit his stride, literally. Savage instincts churned
within Drizzt, and he believed that no single drow could stand
against him. He was fast reverting to the hunter again, the embodi 
ment of primal, passionate rage.
	A dark elf leaped out from behind the next stalagmite; Drizzt
skidded down to one knee and spun, a similar maneuver to the one
he had used against the drow at the mushroom house’s door.
	This time, though, his enemy had more time to react, had his
sword down to the stone to block.
	The hunter knew that he would.
	Drizzt’s lead foot caught hold, and he spun up from his slide, 
his trailing foot flying wide in a circle kick that caught the surprised
drow under the chin and dropped him over the side of the ledge. He
caught a handhold just a few feet down, groggy from the blow and
thinking that this purple eyed fiend would surely kill him.
	The hunter was already gone, though, running on, running for
freedom.
	Drizzt saw another drow on the path in front of him, this one’s
arm held up before him, probably aiming a hand crossbow.
	The hunter was quicker than the quarrel. His instincts told him
that, repeatedly, and they were proven correct when a flashing scim 
itar intercepted the dart.
	Then Drizzt was upon the drow, and the drow’s ally, who came
out from behind the nearest mound. The two enemies worked furi 
ously with their weapons, thinking their numerical advantage more
than sufficient.
	They didn’t understand the hunter, but the red glowing eyes
of Artemis Entreri, watching from a nearby hollow, did.


Part 4
IN THE WEB
ne of the sects of Faerun names the sins of humanity as seven, 
and foremost among them is pride. My interpretation of this
had always been to think of the arrogance of kings, who pro 
claimed themselves gods, or at least convinced their subjects
that they spoke with some divine beings, thus conveying the image that
their power was god given.
	That is only one manifestation of this most deadly of sins. One does
not have to be a king to be taken down by false pride. Montolio DeBrouchee, 
my ranger mentor, warned me about this, but his lessons concerned a per 
sonal aspect of pride. “A ranger often walks alone, but never walks without
friends nearby, ” the wise man explained. “A ranger knows his surround 
ings and knows where allies might be found.”
	To Mon tolio’s way of thinking, pride was blindness, a blurring of
insight and wisdom, and the defeat of trust. A too proud man walked alone
and cared not where allies might be found.
	When I discovered the web of Menzoberranzan growing thick about
me, I understood my error, my arrogance. Had I come to think so much of
myself and my abilities that I forgot those allies who had, to this point, 
allowed me to survive? In my anger over the death of Wulfgar and my fears
for Catti-brie, Bruenor, and Regis, I never considered that those living
friends could help to take care of themselves. The problem that had befallen
us all was my own fault, I had decided, and, thus, was my duty to correct, 
however impossible that might be for a single person.
	I would go to Menzoberranzan, discover the truth, and end the con 
flict, even if that end meant the sacrifice of my own life.
	What a fool I had been.
	Pride told me that I was the cause of Wulfgar’s death; pride told me
that I could be the one to right the wrong. Sheer arrogance prevented me
from dealing openly with my friend, the dwarven king, who could muster
the forces necessary to combat any forthcoming drow attacks.
	On that ledge on the Isle of Rothe, I realized that I would pay for my
arrogance; later, I would learn that others dear to me might pay as well.
	It is a deftat of the spirit to learn that one’s arrogance causes such loss
and pain. Pride invites you to soar to heights of personal triumph, but the
wind is stronger at those heights and the footing, tentative. Farther, then, is
the fall.

, Drizzt Do’Urden

Chapter 18
VALIANT FAILURE


	She noticed a dark elf on the isle’s dock, waving his arms
and motioning for her to go back. He seemed to be
alone.
	Catti-brie lifted Taulmaril and let fly. The arrow cut
the darkness as would a bolt of lightning, slamming into the sur 
prised drow’s chest and hurling him back a dozen feet. Catti-brie
and Guenhwyvar stepped onto the beach a minute later. The young
woman felt the locket and started to tell Guenhwyvar to run around
to the right, but the panther had already sensed the nearness of its
master, was already in full flight across the broken landscape, 
veering in from the beach as it ran.
	The woman followed as quickly as she could, but lost sight of
the speeding cat almost immediately as Guenhwyvar cut a sharp
turn around the base of the nearest hillock, claws throwing up moist
turf.
	Catti-brie heard a startled cry and, when she came around the
base of that mound, she saw a dark elf soldier, looking away from
her, his gaze apparently following the run of the panther. One of his
arms was upraised, steadying a hand crossbow.
	Catti-brie fired on the run, her arrow going high and scorching a
hole in the side of the mound, just inches above the drow’s head. He
spun about immediately and retaliated, the dart clipping the turf
near the diving and rolling woman.
	Quick to fit another arrow, Catti-brie fired next, driving a hole in
the drow soldier’s trailing piwafzvi as he scrambled to the side. He
skidded to one knee, fitted a quarrel as he went, and raised his arm
again.
	Catti-brie fired also, the arrow blasting through the hand 
crossbow and the drow’s hand, slicing out his wrist and burying
deep in his upper chest.
	She had won the duel, but had lost precious time. Disoriented, 
the young woman needed the locket again to direct her, and off she
ran.



	His skilled opponents’ fierce attacks soon became measured
strikes as Drizzt parried every move and often managed an effective
counter. One of the drow held just one weapon now, with his dirk
arm tucked in close to his side to stem the flow of blood from a curv 
ing scimitar gash.
	Drizzt’s confidence continued to soar. How many enemies were
here on the isle? he wondered, and he dared to believe that he might
win.
	His blood froze when he heard a roar behind him, thinking that
some monstrous ally had come to his enemies’ aid. The wounded
drow soldier widened his eyes in terror and began to backpedal, but
Drizzt took little comfort in that. Most drow allies were tentative at
best, chaotic creatures of incredible and unpredictable power. If this
were indeed some summoned monster, some demonic ally, stalking’
from behind him, then Drizzt was surely its primary target.
	The backpedaling drow broke into a dead run, fleeing along the
ledge, and Drizzt used his departure to work around to the side, to
try to get a look at what he would face next.
	A black feline form whipped past him, pursuing his fleeing
enemy. For an instant, he thought that some drow must have a fig 
urine similar to his own, must have summoned a cat similar to
Guenhwyvar. But this was Guenhwyvar! Drizzt knew instinctively.
This was his Guenhwyvar!
	Excitement fast turned to confusion. Drizzt thought that Regis
must have called the panther, back in Mithril Hall, and that the cat
must have come running out after him. It made no sense, though, 
for Guenhwyvar could not remain on the Material Plane long
enough to make the journey all the way from the dwarven strong 
hold. The figurine had to have been carried to Menzoberranzan.
	A cunning sword thrust slipped through Drizzt’s defenses
momentarily, the weapon tip nicking into his fine armor and sting 
ing his breast. It brought the distracted ranger from his reverie, 
reminding Drizzt that he had to take one enemy and one problem at
a time.
	He came forward in a blinding burst, scimitars waving and
rolling, cutting in at the opposing dark elf from many different
angles. The drow soldier was up to the test, though, his swords
banging away the deadly blades, even smacking the side of Drizzt’s
boot as the ranger tried to kick out at the drow’s knee.
	“Patience, ” Drizzt reminded himself, but with Guenhwyvar’s
appearance and so many unanswered questions, patience was hard
to come by.



	The fleeing drow rounded a bend. Then, with the panther
quickly gaining, he hooked his good arm around a narrow stalag 
mite and spun to the right, leaping over the ledge to splash into the
muck. He got his feet back under him and was bent over, trying to
recover his dropped sword, when Guenhwyvar crashed down, 
driving him into the water.
	He spun and kicked briefly, and when the jumble sorted out, the
panther’s maw was clamped about the pinned drow’s neck, squeez 
ing. He had his face above the water, but could not draw breath, 
would never again draw breath.
	Guenhwyvar came up from the kill, turned to spring back the
dozen feet to the ledge, but dropped low and turned its head, 
snarling suspiciously as a rainbow hued bubble floated over it.
Before Guenhwyvar could react, the strange thing burst, and Guen 
hwyvar was showered by flecks of tingling material.
	Guenhwyvar leaped for the ledge, but felt as though the
intended target was getting farther and farther away. The panther
roared again, in protest, understanding then the nature of those
flecks, understanding that they were sending it back to its own
plane of existence.
	The roar was soon lost to the gentle lapping of the stirred
ripples and the clang of steel from up on the ledge.
	Jarlaxle leaned against the stone wall, considering this new
development. He put away his valuable metal whistle, the item that
had dismissed the dangerous panther, and lifted one of his boots so
that he could wipe the muck from it. Casually, the cocky mercenary
looked up to the continuing sounds of battle, confident that Drizzt
Do’Urden would soon be taken.



	Catti-brie was pinned down in the ravine; two dark elves stood
sheltered behind twin mounds directly ahead of her, and a third
plucked away with his hand crossbow from the base of the hillock
to her left. She squeezed in close to her own stalagmite cover as best
she could, but still felt vulnerable as darts ricocheted all about her.
Every now and then she managed a shot, but her enemies were well
under cover and the streaking arrows skipped and sparked harm 
lessly off the many stones.
	A quarrel nicked the young woman’s knee; another forced her
to duck deeper into the cubby, forced her to angle her body so that
she probably wouldn’t be able to fire her bow again. Catti-brie grew
scared then, thinking that defeat had caught up with her. There was
no way she could win against three well trained and well armed
drow soldiers.
	A quarrel stuck into the heel of her boot, but did not penetrate.
The young woman took a long, deep breath. She told herself stub 
bornly that she had to try to retaliate, that crouching here would
prove worthless and would ensure her, and Drizzt’s, death.
	The thought of her friend gave her courage, and she wriggled
about for a shot. She cursed aloud as she fired, for her enemies, 
again, were well hidden.
	Or were they? Catti-brie scrambled suddenly to the back side of
the stalagmite cluster, putting as much interference between herself
and the drow on the hillock as possible. She was an open target now
to the two soldiers ahead of her, but she was only a target if they
managed to get off any shots.
	Taulmaril hummed repeatedly, continuously, as the woman
loosed a mighty barrage. She saw no dark elf forms to shoot at, but
went after their cover instead, each enchanted arrow pounding
away at the twin stalagmites. Sparks flew all about the target area.
Chips of flying stone sizzled as they arced into the air.
	Unable to come out long enough to retaliate, the two drow lost
their nerve and fled down the ravine. Catti-brie got one in the back, 
then lifted an arrow for the second.
	She felt a sting in her side and turned about to see another
enemy barely ten feet away, smiling confidently with his hand 
crossbow out in front of him.
	Catti-brie whipped about, her deadly bow falling in line. The
drow’s mouth opened wide in a suddenly terrified scream, and
Catti-brie put the arrow right into his face, hurling him head over
heels through the air.
	The young woman looked to her bleeding side. She grimaced
and yanked out the stinging quarrel, then pulled herself up to her
feet and looked all about. She couldn’t be certain that this last drow
had been the one from the hillock, but she felt the insidious poison
creeping into her limbs and knew that she couldn’t wait around to
make sure that no other enemies were creeping behind her. Deter 
minedly, the young woman began to scale the ravine’s broken wall
and soon she was up on the ledge, trotting along, trying to keep her
focus and her balance.
	Twinkle hooked inside the drow’s sword, and Drizzt sent it
rotating, the two weapons cutting great circles in the air between the
combatants. His opponent sneaked a thrust in behind the fast flying
blades, but Drizzt’s other scimitar was in line, knocking the second
sword harmlessly aside.
	Drizzt kept the momentum up, even increased the pressure of
the spin. Around went the blades, low and high, and now it was
Drizzt who kept his free weapon slipping in through their wake, 
with cunning strikes that kept his opponent dancing back and off
balance. With his superior agility, Drizzt was in control of the cir 
cling blades, and both opponents knew that the ranger was gaining
the advantage.
	The enemy drow tightened his muscles to apply counterpres 
sure against Twinkle, exactly what cunning Drizzt had been wait 
ing for. The instant he felt the pressure on his blade, sword and
scimitar coming up again before his eyes, he ended his roundabout
cut, reversed direction, and snapped Twinkle in a short loop, strik 
ing the drow’s sword on the other side. Overbalanced by the sud 
den release, the drow soldier stumbled and could not reverse his
pressure on the sword.
	His blade dove low and flew out wide across his body, twisting
him to the side. He tried to get his other sword around for a block, 
but Drizzt’s second scimitar was too quick, jabbing hard into the
side of his abdomen.
	He fell back, reeling, one sword dropping to the stone.
	Drizzt heard a call; someone rammed him hard in the shoulder, 
slamming him against the stone wall. He bounced off and spun, 
scimitars up.
	Entreri! Drizzt’s jaw dropped with his guard.



	Catti-brie spotted Drizzt on the ledge, saw the other drow fall
away, clutching his side, and she cried out as another dark form
rushed from a cranny and barreled into Drizzt. She put her bow up, 
but realized that if the enemy’s body did not stop her arrow, it
would drive through to strike Drizzt. Besides, a wave of dizziness
assaulted the young woman as the effects of the sleeping poison
began to course through her veins.
	She kept Taulmaril ready and staggered on, but the fifty or so
feet to Drizzt seemed like a hundred miles.



	Entreri’s sword flared a green light, further revealing the assas 
sin. But how could it be? Drizzt wondered. He had defeated this
one, had left Entreri for dead in a windy ravine outside Mithril Hall.
	Apparently, not everyone had left Entreri for dead.
	The sword came in a devilish two stroke routine, thrusting low
at Drizzt’s hip, then slashing high, nearly connecting across the
drow’s eyes.
	Drizzt tried to recover his balance, and his sensibilities, but
Entreri was all over him, hacking wildly, growling all the while. A
snap kick caught the ranger in the knee, and he had to throw him 
self away from the wall as the green glowing sword sliced down, 
igniting a line of sparks.
	The snarling assassin spun with Drizzt, sending his dirk in a
wide flying hook. Drizzt’s scimitar banged against the shorter
weapon and it flew away, but Entreri’s hand came on, balling into a
fist, now inside the blocking angle of Drizzt’s weapon.
	A split second before the assassin’s fist smacked into his nose, 
Drizzt realized that Entreri had been one step ahead of him, had
expected, even desired, that exact parry.
	The stunned ranger tumbled backward. Only a narrow stalag 
mite mound prevented Drizzt from flying over the ledge. Entreri
was on him instantly. Sparks, green and blue, erupted as a brutal
swipe of the assassin’s sword took Twinkle from Drizzt’s hands.
	Drizzt’s remaining blade parried the ensuing backhand, but
before he could begin to bend to retrieve his dropped weapon, 
Entreri crouched and kicked Twinkle from the ledge.
	Still off balance, Drizzt tried a downward chop that was easily
foiled, and the assassin countered with another heavy punch, con 
necting solidly with Drizzt’s belly.
	Up swooped Entreri, his sword running an outward circling
arc, taking Drizzt’s scimitar with it. It was a game of chess, and
Entreri was playing white, advantage gained, and not relinquishing
the offensive. Sword and scimitar out wide, the enraged assassin
hurled himself into the ranger, forearm leading, smashing Drizzt in
the face and snapping the drow’s head back brutally against the
stone. Entreri’s sword hit the scimitar again, knocking it straight
out, then again, straight up, and Drizzt, with his sword arm high
and Entreri’s poised to come in at him, recognized his doom. He
rolled away to his right as the sword sliced across, slashing through
his fine cloak, banging hard against his dwarf forged armor and
cutting a line across his armpit, aiding the momentum of his dive.
	Then Drizzt was flying free over the ledge, diving face first into
the muck.
	Entreri instinctively leaped and rolled as he noticed a flash out
of the corner of his eye. A silver streaking arrow sliced across the
jumble of man and cloak, then continued on along the ledge, leaving
Entreri prone on the stone, groaning. He managed to slip a hand out
from under him, fingers inching to his dropped dirk.
	“Drizzt!” Catti-brie called, her grogginess temporarily defeated
by the sight of her fallen friend. Drawing her sword, the woozy
woman increased her pace, not sure of whether to finish the assassin
first or look for the downed drow.
	Nearing the spot, she veered for the stalagmite, but the choice
was moot, for the assassin sprang to his feet, apparently unhurt. The
arrow had missed, cutting only a clean hole in Entreri’s flapping
cloak.
	Catti-brie fought through teary eyes and gritted teeth, smacked
aside Entreri’s first sword thrust and reached for the jeweled dagger
on her belt. Her movements were sluggish, though, for the insidious
sleeping poison was fast overwhelming the adrenaline rush, and, as
her fingers closed on the dagger, she suddenly found her sword
slapped away and a dirk pressing the back of her hand, pinning it in
place against the dagger hilt.
	Entreri’s sword tip was up, dangerously high and dangerously
free.
	The end was upon her, Catti-brie knew, and all her world had
flown away. She felt only the cold steel of Entreri’s sword slipping
through the tender skin of her neck.

Chapter 19
FALSE PRIDE


He is alive, the soldier signaled to Jarlaxle as he inspected

the downed ranger.
     	The mercenary leader motioned for the soldier to
turn the fallen Drizzt so that his head was out of the
water. Jarlaxle looked across the still lake, understanding that the
sound of battle had echoed clearly across its waters. The mercenary
saw the distinctive, pale blue glow of driftdisks, flying disks of
energy typically used to carry matron mothers across the city, float 
ing out from the banks. They held House Baenre soldiers, Jarlaxle
knew.
	Leave him, the mercenary leader signaled to his soldier, and his
equipment. Almost as an afterthought, Jarlaxle pulled his whistle out
once more, put it to his lips, and faced Drizzt, then blew a high note.
The whistle’s dweomer showed him that the ranger wore magical
armor, at least as fine as drow make, and Jarlaxle sighed when he
saw the intensity of Twinkle’s enchantment. He would have loved
to add that scimitar to his armory, but it was well known in Menzo 
berranzan that Drizzt Do’Urden fought with two scimitars, and if
one was missing, the mercenary would only be inviting trouble
from Matron Baenre.
	Drizzt carried little else that was enchanted, except for one item
that caught and held the mercenary’s attention. Its magic was strong
indeed, shining in the hues common to charm enchantments, 
exactly the type of item that cagey Jarlaxle used to best effect.
	His soldier, having shifted the unconscious ranger so that
Drizzt’s face was above the murky water, started toward Jarlaxle, 
but the mercenary leader stopped him. Take the pendant, Jarlaxle’s
fingers instructed.
	The soldier turned about and seemed to notice the approaching
driftdisks for the first time. “Baenre?” he asked quietly as he turned
back to his leader.
	They willfind their quarry, Jarlaxle signaled confidently. And
Matron Baenre will know who delivè red Drizzt Do’Urden to her.



	Entreri wasn’t about to ask what drow female he was killing
this time. He was working in concert with Bregan D’aerthe, and this
drow, like the one in the mushroom house, had interfered, and was
a witness.
	A timely glance showed him something that gave him pause, 
though, showed him a familiar jeweled dagger hanging on this
drow’s belt.
	Entreri studied the female closely, kept his sword tip at her
neck, drawing small droplets of blood. He shifted the weapon
deftly, and a subtle ridge showed along the female’s smooth skin.
	“Why are you here?” Entreri asked breathlessly, honestly sur 
prised. He knew that this one had not come to Menzoberranzan
beside Drizzt, Councilor Firble of Blingdenstone certainly would
have mentioned her. Jarlaxle certainly would have known about
her!
	Yet, here she was, surprisingly resourceful.
	Entreri shifted his sword again from her neck, then delicately
tipped it up under the crease beneath her chin and used it to remove
the magical mask.
	Catti-brie fought hard to sublimate her mounting terror. This
was too much like the first time she had been in Artemis Entreri’s
clutches; the assassin evoked an almost irrational horror in her, a
deep fear that no other monster, neither a dragon nor a fiend of
Tarterus, could bring.
	Here he was again, amazingly alive, with his sword to her vul 
nerable throat.
	“An unexpected bonus, ” Entreri mused. He chuckled evilly, as
though he was trying to sort out the best way to make his prisoner
profitable.
	Catti-brie thought of leaping over the ledge, if she had been
near a cliff a thousand feet in the air, she would have considered it!
She felt the hairs on the back of her neck tingle, felt sweat beading
on her brow.
	“No, ” she uttered, and Entreri’s features twisted with confu 
sion.
	“No?” he echoed, not understanding that her remark had been
aimed inward.
	Catti-brie steeled her gaze at him. “So ye’ve survived, ” she
remarked matter of factly. “To go and live among those who’re
most akin to ye.”
	She saw by the assassin’s slight grimace that Entreri did not like
that description. He confirmed that fact by punching her with his
sword hilt, raising a welt on the woman’s cheek and bringing a
trickle of blood from her nose.
	Catti-brie fell back, but straightened immediately, and stared at
the assassin with unblinking eyes. She would not give Entreri the
satisfaction of terror, not this time.
	“1 should kill you, ” Entreri whispered. “Slowly.”
	Catti-brie laughed at him. “Then do, ” she replied. “Ye’ve no
hold over me, not since I’ve seen the proof that Drizzt is yer better.”
	Entreri, in sudden rage, almost ran her through. “Was, ” he cor 
rected, then he looked wickedly to the ledge.
	“I’ve seen ye both fall more than once, ” Catti-brie asserted with
as much conviction as she could muster in that dark moment. “I’ll
not call either of ye dead until I’ve felt the cold body!”
	“Drizzt is alive, ” came a whisper from behind, spoken in perfect
surface Common, as Jarlaxle and two Bregan D’aerthe soldiers
moved to join the assassin. One of them stopped to finish off the
squirming drow with the wounded side.
	His rage taking control, Entreri instinctively swung again at
Catti-brie, but this time the woman lifted a stiffened hand and
turned her wrist, subtly diverting the blow.
	Then Jarlaxle was between them, eyeing Catti-brie with more
than a passing interest. “By the luck of a Lloth blessed spider, ” the
mercenary leader remarked, and he lifted a hand to stroke Catti 
brie’s bruised cheek.
	“Baenre approaches, ” the soldier behind the mercenary leader
reminded, using the Drow tongue.
	“Indeed, ” Jarlaxle replied absently, again in the surface lan 
guage. He seemed wholly absorbed by this exotic woman standing
before him. “We must be on our way.
	Catti-brie straightened, as though she expected the killing blow
to fall. Jarlaxle reached up instead and removed the circlet from her
head, in effect, blinding her. She offered no resistance as Taulmaril
and her quiver were taken from her, and knew that it was Entreri’s
rough grasp that snapped the jeweled dagger from her belt sheath.
	A strong but surprisingly gentle hand hooked her upper arm
and led her away, away from the fallen Drizzt.

	Caught again, Drizzt thought, and this time he knew that the
reception would not be as pleasant as his stay in Blingdenstone. He
had walked into the spider’s web, had delivered the prized catch to
the dinner table.
	He was shackled to a wall, standing on his tiptoes to keep from
hanging by his sore wrists. He did not remember coming to this
place, did not know how long he had hung here, in the dark and
dirty room, but both his wrists ached and showed hot welts to his
infravision, as though most of the skin had been worn away. Drizzt’s
left shoulder also hurt, and he felt an uncomfortable stretch along his
upper chest and armpit, where Entreri’s sword had hit him.
	He realized, though, that one of the priestesses must have
cleaned the gash and healed him, for the wound had been worse
when he had gone off the ledge. That supposition did little to bolster
Drizzt’s spirits, though, for drow sacrifices were usually in the very
best of health before they were given to the Spider Queen.
	But, through it all, the pain and the helplessness, the ranger
fought hard to find some measure of comfort. In his heart Drizzt
had known all along that it would end this way, that he would be
taken and killed so that his friends in Mithril Hall might live in
peace. Drizzt had long ago accepted death, and had resigned him 
self to that probability when he had last ventured from Mithril Hall.
But why, then, was he so uncomfortable?
	The unremarkable room was just a cave with shackles built into
the stone along three walls and a cage hanging from the ceiling.
Drizzt’s survey of the place was cut short as the iron bound door
creaked open and two uniformed drow female soldiers rushed in, 
going to rigid attention at either side of the portal.
	Drizzt firmed his jaw and set his gaze, determined to face his
death with dignity.
	An illithid walked through the door.
	Drizzt’s mouth dropped open, but he quickly regained his com 
posure. A mind flayer? He balked, but when he took the moment to
consider the creature, he came to realize that he must be in House
Baenre’s dungeon. That was not a comforting thought, for either
him or his friends.
	Two drow priestesses, one small and vicious looking, her face
angular and her mouth tight in a perpetual pout, the other taller, 
more dignified, but no less imposing, came in behind the illithid.
Then came the legendary, withered matron mother, sitting easily on
a floating driftdisk, flanked by another female, a younger, more
beautiful version of Matron Baenre. At the end of the train came two
males, fighters, judging from their attire and weapons.
	The glow from Matron Baenre’s disk allowed Drizzt to shift his
gaze to the normal spectrum, and he noticed a pile of bones under
one of the other pairs of shackles.
	Drizzt looked back to the entourage, to the drow males, his gaze
settling on the younger of the two for a long moment. It was
Berg’inyon, he believed, a classmate of his at the drow Academy, the
second ranking fighter of Drizzt’s class, second behind Drizzt.
	The three younger females fanned out in a line behind Matron
Baenre’s driftdisk; the two males stood beside the female soldiers at
the door. The illithid, to Drizzt’s amazement, and supreme discom 
fort, paced about the captured drow, its tentacles waving near
Drizzt’s face, brushing his skin, teasing him. Drizzt had seen such
tentacles suck the brains out of a dark elf, and it was all he could do
to hold his nerve with the wretched creature so near.
	“Drizzt Do’Urden, ” Matron Baenre remarked.
	She knew his name. Drizzt realized that to be a bad sign. That
sickly, uncomfortable feeling welled within him again, and he was
beginning to understand why.
	“Noble fool!” Matron Baenre snapped suddenly. “To come to
Menzoberranzan, knowing the price upon your pitiful head!” She
came forward, off the driftdisk, in a sudden rush and slapped Drizzt
across the face. “Noble, arrogant fool! Did you dare to believe that
you could win? Did you think that five thousand years of what has
been could be disrupted by pitiful you?”
	The outburst surprised Drizzt, but he kept his visage solid, his
eyes straight ahead.
	Matron Baenre’s scowl disappeared, replaced suddenly by a
wry smile. Drizzt always hated that typical trait of his people. So
volatile and unpredictable, dark elves kept enemies and friends
alike off guard, never letting a prisoner or a guest know exactly
where they stood.
	“Let your pride be appeased, Drizzt Do’Urden, ” Matron Baenre
said with a chuckle. “I introduce my daughter Bladen’Kerst Baenre, 
second eldest to Triel.” She indicated the female in the middle. “And
Vendes Baenre, ” she continued, indicating the smallest of the three.
“And Quenthel. Behind stand my sons, Dantrag and Berg’inyon, 
who is known to you.~~
	“Well met, ” Drizzt said cheerily to Berg’inyon. He managed a
smile with his salutation and received another vicious slap from the
matron mother.
	“Six Baenres have come to see you, Drizzt Do’Urden, ” Matron
Baenre went on, and Drizzt wished that she would quit repeating
his name with every sentence! “You should feel honored, Drizzt
Do’Urden.”
	“I would clasp wrists, ” Drizzt replied, “but. . .“ He looked help 
lessly up to his chained hands and barely flinched as another sting 
ing slap predictably came against his face.
	“You know that you will be given to Lloth, ” Baenre said.
	Drizzt looked her straight in the eye. “In body, but never in
soul.”
	“Good, ” purred the matron mother. “You will not die quickly, 
I promise. You will prove a wellspring of information, Drizzt
Do’Urden.”
	For the first time in the conversation, a dark cloud crossed
Drizzt’s features.
	“I will torture him, Mother, ” Vendes offered eagerly.
	“Duk Tak!” Matron Baenre scolded, turning sharply on her
daughter.
	“Duk Tak, ” Drizzt mouthed under his breath, then he recog 
nized the name. In the Drow tongue, duk tak meant, literally, unholy
executioner. It was also the nickname of one of the Baenre daugh 
ters, this one apparently, whose handiwork, in the form of dark
elves turned into ebony statues, was often on display at the drow
Academy.
	“Wonderful, ” Drizzt muttered.
	“You have heard of my precious daughter?” Matron Baenre
asked, spinning back to the prisoner. “She will have her time with
you, I promise, Drizzt Do’Urden, but not before you provide me
with valuable information.”
	Drizzt cast a doubting look the withered drow’s way.
	“You can withstand any torture, ” Matron Baenre remarked.
“That I do not doubt, noble fool.” She lifted a wrinkled hand to
stroke the illithid who had moved to her side. “But can you with 
stand the intrusions of a mind flayer?”
	Drizzt felt the blood drain from his face. He had once been a
prisoner of the cruel illithids, a helpless, hapless fool, his mind
nearly broken by their overpowering wills. Could he fend such
intrusions?
	“You thought this would end, 0 noble fool!” Matron Baenre
screeched. “You delivered the prize, stupid, arrogant, noble fool!”
	Drizzt felt that sick feeling return tenfold. He couldn’t hide his
cringe as the matron mother went on, her logic following an
inescapable course that tore into Drizzt Do’Urden’s heart.
	“You are but one prize, ” she said. “And you will aid us in the
conquest of another. Mithril Hall will be ours more easily now that
King Bruenor Battlehammer’s strongest ally is out of the way. And
that very ally will show us the dwarven weaknesses.
	“Methil!” she commanded, and the illithid walked directly in
front of Drizzt. The ranger closed his eyes, but felt the four octopus 
like tentacles of the creature’s grotesque head squirm across his face, 
as if looking for specific spots.
	Drizzt cried out in horror, snapped his head about wildly, and
even managed to bite one of the tentacles.
	The illithid fell back.
	“Duk Tak!” Matron Baenre commanded, and eager Vendes
rushed forward, slamming a brass covered fist into Drizzt’s cheek.
She hit him again, and a third time, gaining momentum, feeding off
the torture.
	“Must he be conscious?” she asked, her voice pleading.
	“Enough!” Drizzt heard Matron Baenre reply, though her voice
seemed far away. Vendes smacked him once more, then he felt the
tentacles squirm over his face again. He tried to protest, to move his
head about, but he hadn’t the strength.
	The tentacles found a hold; Drizzt felt little pulses of energy run
through his face.
	His screams over the next ten minutes were purely instinctive, 
primal, as the mind flayer probed his mind, sent horrid images
careening through his thoughts and devoured every mental counter
Drizzt had to offer. He felt naked, vulnerable, stripped of his very
emotions.
	Through it all, Drizzt, though he did not know it, fought
valiantly, and when Methil moved back from him, the illithid
turned to Matron Baenre and shrugged.
	“What have you learned?” the matron mother demanded.
	This one is strong, Methil replied telepathically. It will take more
sessions.
	“Continue!” snapped Baenre.
	“He will die, ” Methil somehow said in a gurgling, watery sound 
ing voice. “Tomorrow.”
	Matron Baenre thought for a moment, then nodded her accord.
She looked to Vendes, her vicious Duk Tak, and snapped her fin 
gers, sending the wild drow into a fierce rush.
	Drizzt’s world fell away into blackness.

Chapter 20
PERSONAL AGENDA


The female?” Triel asked impatiently, pacing Jarlaxle’s
private quarters in a secret cave along one wall of the
Clawrift, a great chasm in the northeastern section of~
Menzoberranzan.
	“Beheaded, ” the mercenary answered easily. He knew that Triel
was employing some sort of lie detection magic, but was confident
that he could dance around any such spells. “She was a youngest
daughter, an unimpressive noble, of a lower house.”
	Triel stopped and focused her glare on the evasive mercenary.
Jarlaxle knew well that the angry Baenre was not asking about that
female, that Khareesa H’kar creature. Khareesa, like all the slavers
on the Isle of Rothe, had been killed, as ordered, but reports filtering
back to Triel had suggested another female, and a mysterious great
cat as well.
	Jarlaxle played the staring game better than any. He sat comfort 
ably behind his great desk, even relaxed in his chair. He leaned back
and dropped his booted feet atop the desk.
	Triel swept across the room in a rush and slapped his feet away.
She leaned over the desk to put her scowl close to the cocky merce 
nary. The priestess heard a slight shuffle to one side, then another
from the floor, and suspected that Jarlaxle had many allies here, con 
cealed behind secret doors, ready to spring out and protect the
leader of Bregan D’aerthe.
	“Not that female, ” she breathed, trying to keep things some 
what calm. Triel was the leader of the highest school in the drow
Academy, the eldest daughter of the first house of Menzoberranzan, 
and a mighty high priestess in full favor (as far as she knew) of the
Spider Queen. She did not fear Jarlaxle or his allies, but she did fear
her mother’s wrath if she was forced to kill the often helpful merce 
nary, if she precipitated a covert war, or even an atmosphere of
uncooperation, between valuable Bregan D’aerthe and House
Baenre.
	And she knew that Jarlaxle understood her paralysis against
him, knew that Jarlaxle grasped it better than anyone and would
exploit it every step of the way.
	Pointedly throwing off his smile, pretending to be serious, the
mercenary lifted his gaudy hat and ran a hand slowly over the side
of his bald head. “Dear Triel, ” he replied calmly. “I tell you in all
honesty that there was no other drow female on the Isle of Rothe, or
near the isle, unless she was a soldier of House Baenre.”
	Triel backed off from the desk, gnawed at her lips, and won 
dered where to turn next. As far as she could tell, the mercenary was
not lying, and either Jarlaxle had found some way to counter her
magic, or he was speaking the truth.
	“If there was, I certainly would have reported it to you, ” Jarlaxle
added, and the obvious lie twanged discordantly in Triel’s mind.
	Jarlaxle hid his smile well. He had thrown out that last lie just
to let Triel know that her spell was in place. By her incredulous
expression, Jarlaxle knew that he had won that round.
	“I heard of a great panther, ” Triel prompted.
	“Magnificent cat, ” Jarlaxle agreed, “the property of one Drizzt
Do’Urden, if I have read the history of the renegade correctly. Guen 
hwyvar, by name, taken from the corpse of Masoj Hun’ett after
Drizzt slew Masoj in battle.”
	“I heard that the panther, this Guenhwyvar, was on the Isle of
Rothe, ” Triel clarified impatiently.
	“Indeed, ” replied the mercenary. He slid a metallic whistle out
from under his cloak and held it before his eyes. “On the isle, then
dissolved into an insubstantial mist.”
	“And the summoning device?”
	“You have Drizzt, my dear Triel, ” Jarlaxle replied calmly. “Nei 
ther I nor any of my band got anywhere near the renegade except in
battle. And, in case you’ve never witnessed Drizzt Do’Urden in
battle, let me assure you that my soldiers had more on their minds
than picking that one’s pockets!”
	Triel’s expression grew suspicious.
	“Oh, one lesser soldier did go to the fallen renegade, ” Jarlaxle
clarified, as though he had forgotten that one minor detail. “But he
took no figurine, no summoning device at all, from Drizzt, I assure
you."
	“And neither you nor any of your soldiers happened to find the
onyx figurine?”
'No, ’
	Again, the crafty mercenary had spoken nothing but the truth, 
for Artemis Entreri was not, technically, a soldier of Bregan
D’aerthe.
	Triel’s spell told her that Jarlaxle’s words had been correct, but
all reports claimed that the panther had been about on the isle and
House Baenre’s soldiers had not been able to locate the valuable fig 
urine. Some thought it might have flown from Drizzt when he had
gone over the ledge, landing somewhere in the murky water. Magi 
cal detection spells hadn’t located it, but that could be readily
explained by the nature of Donigarten. Calm on the surface, the
dark lake was well known for strong undercurrents, and for darker
things lurking in the deep.
	Still, the Baenre daughter was not convinced about either the
female or the panther. Jarlaxle had beaten her this time, she knew, 
but she trusted in her reports as much as she didn’t trust in the
mercenary.
	Her ensuing expression, a pout so uncommon to the proud
Baenre daughter, actually caught Jarlaxle off guard.
	“The plans proceed, ” Triel said suddenly. “Matron Baenre has
brought together a high ritual, a ceremony that will be heightened
now that she has secured a most worthy sacrifice.”
	Jarlaxle considered the words carefully, and the weight with
which Triel had spoken them. Drizzt, the initial link to Mithril Hall, 
had been delivered, but Matron Baenre still planned to proceed, 
with all speed, to the conquest of Mithril Hall. What would Lloth
think of all this? the mercenary had to wonder.
	“Surely your matron will take the time to consider all options, ”
Jarlaxle replied calmly.
	“She nears her death, ” Triel snapped in reply. “She is hungry for
the conquest and will not allow herself to die until it has been
achieved.”
	Jarlaxle nearly laughed at that phrase, “will not allow herself to
die, ” then he considered the withered matron mother. Baenre
should have died centuries ago, and yet she somehow lived on.
Perhaps Triel was right, the mercenary mused. Perhaps Matron
Baenre understood that the decades were finally catching up with
her, so she would push on to the conquest without regard for con 
sequences. Jarlaxle loved chaos, loved war, but this was a matter
that required careful thinking. The mercenary truly enjoyed his life
in Menzoberranzan. Might Matron Baenre be jeopardizing that
existence?
	“She thinks Drizzt’s capture a good thing, ” Triel went on, “and
it is, indeed it is! That renegade is a sacrifice long overdue the
Spider Queen.”  
	“But.. .“ Jarlaxle prompted.
	“But how will the alliance hold together when the other matron
mothers learn that Drizzt is already taken?” Triel pointed out. “It is
a tentative thing, at best, and more tentative still if some come to
believe that Lloth’s sanction of the raid is no more, that the main
goal in going to the surface has already been achieved.”
	Jarlaxle folded his fingers in front of him and paused for a long
while. She was wise, this Baenre daughter, wise and as experienced
in the ways of the drow as any in the city, except for her mother
and, perhaps, Jarlaxle. But now she, with so much more to lose, had
shown the mercenary something he had not thought of on his own, 
a potentially serious problem.
	Trying vainly to hide her frustration, Triel spun away from the
desk and marched across the small room, hardly slowing as she
plunged straight into the unconventional portal, almost an inter 
planar goo that made her walk along a watery corridor for many
steps (though the door seemed to be only several inches thick)
before exiting between two smirking Bregan D’aerthe guardsmen
in a corridor.
	A moment later, Jarlaxle saw the heated outline of a drow hand
against his almost translucent door, the signal that Triel was gone
from the complex. A lever under the top of the mercenary’s desk
opened seven different secret doors, from the floor and the walls, 
and out stepped or climbed several dark elves and one human, 
Artemis Entreri.
	“Triel heard reports of the female on the isle, ” Jarlaxle said to
the drow soldiers, his most trusted advisors. “Go among the ranks
and learn who, if any, betrayed us to the Baenre daughter.”
	“And kill him?” asked one eager drow, a vicious specimen
whose skills Jarlaxle valued when conducting interrogations.
	The mercenary leader put a condescending look over the
impetuous drow, and the other Bregan D’aerthe soldiers followed
suit. Tradition in the underground band did not call for the execu 
tion of spies, but rather the subtle manipulation. Jarlaxle had proven
many times that he could get as much done, plant as much disinfor 
mation, with an enemy informant as with his own spies and, to dis 
ciplined Bregan D’aerthe, any plant that Triel had in place among
the ranks would be a benefit.
	Without needing to speak another word to his well trained and
well practiced advisors, Jarlaxle waved them away.
	“This adventure grows more fun by the hour, ” the mercenary
remarked to Entreri when they were gone. He looked the assassin
right in the eye. “Despite the disappointments.”
	The remark caught Entreri off guard. He tried to decipher what
Jarlaxle might be talking about.
	“You knew that Drizzt was in the Underdark, knew even that he
was close to Menzoberranzan and soon to arrive, ” the mercenary
began, though that statement told Entreri nothing enlightening.
	“The trap was perfectly set and perfectly executed, ” the assassin
argued, and Jarlaxle couldn’t really disagree, though several sol 
diers were wounded and four had died. Such losses had to be
expected when dealing with one as fiery as Drizzt. “I was the one
who brought Drizzt down and captured Catti-brie, ” Entreri point 
edly reminded him.
	“Therein lies your error, ” Jarlaxle said with an accusing snicker.
	Entreri eyed him with sincere confusion.
	“The human woman called Catti-brie followed Drizzt down
here, using Guenhwyvar and this, ” he said, holding up the magical, 
heart shaped locket. “She followed blindly, by all reasoning, 
through twisting caverns and terrible mazes. She could never hope
to retrace her steps.”
	“She will not likely be leaving, ” Entreri added dryly.
	“Therein lies your error, ” Jarlaxle repeated. His smile was wide, 
and now Entreri was beginning to catch on.
	“Drizzt Do’Urden alone could have guided you from the depths
of the Underdark, ” Jarlaxle told him plainly. The mercenary tossed
the locket to Entreri. “Feel its warmth, ” he explained, “the warmth
of the warrior’s blood coursing through the veins of Drizzt Do’Urden.
When it cools, then know that Drizzt is no more, and know that
your sunlight world is lost to you forever.
	“Except for an occasional glance, perhaps, when Mithril Hall is
taken, ” Jarlaxle added with a sly wink.
	Entreri resisted the impulse to leap over the desk and murder
the mercenary, mostly because he suspected that another lever
under that desktop would open seven other trap doors and bring
Jarlaxle’s closest, closest advisors storming upon him. But truly, 
after that initial moment, the assassin was more intrigued than
angered, both by Jarlaxle’s sudden proclamation that he would
never see the surface world, and by the thought that Drizzt Do’Urden
could have led him out of the Underdark. Thinking, still holding the
locket, the assassin started for the door.
	“Did I mention that House Horlbar has begun its inquiry into
the death of Jerlys?” Jarlaxle queried at his back, stopping the
assassin in midstride. “They have even approached Bregan D’aerthe, 
willing to pay dearly for information. How ironic, wouldn’t you
agree?”
	Entreri did not turn about. He simply walked to the door and
pushed out of the room. It was more food for thought.
	Jarlaxle, ioo, was thinking, thinking that this entire episode
might become more delicious yet. He thought that Triel had pointed
out some snares that Matron Baenre, blinded by her lust for power, 
would never notice. He thought most of all that the Spider Queen, 
in her love of chaos, had placed him in a position to turn the world
of Menzoberranzan upon its head.
	Matron Baenre had her own agenda, and Triel certainly had
hers, and now Jarlaxle was solidifying one of his own, for no better
reason than the onslaught of furious chaos, from which the cunning
mercenary always seemed to emerge better off than before.



	The semiconscious Drizzt did not know how long the punish 
ment had gone on. Vendes was brilliant at her cruel craft, finding
every sensitive area on the hapless prisoner and beating it, gouging, 
it, raking it with wickedly tipped instruments. She kept Drizzt on
the verge of unconsciousness, never allowing him to black out com 
pletely, kept him feeling the excruciating pain.
	Then she left, and Drizzt slumped low on his shackles, unable to
comprehend the damage the hard edged rings were doing to his
wrists. All the ranger wanted at the terrible time was to fall away
from the world, from his pained body. He could not think of the sur 
face, of his friends. He remembered that Guenhwyvar had been on
the island, but could not concentrate enough to remember the sig 
nificance of that.
	He was defeated; for the first time in his life, Drizzt wondered if
death would be preferable to life.
	He felt someone grab roughly at his hair and yank his head
back. He tried to see through his blurry and swollen eyes, for he
feared that wicked Vendes had returned. The voices he heard, 
though, were male.
	A flask came up against his lips, and his head was yanked hard
to the side, angled so that the liquid would pour down his throat.
Instinctively, thinking this some poison, or some potion that would
steal his free will, Drizzt resisted. He spat out some of the liquid, but
got his head slammed hard against the wall for the effort, and more
of the sour tasting stuff rolled down his throat.
	Drizzt felt burning throughout his body, as though his insides
were on fire. In what he believed were his last gasps of life, he strug 
gled fiercely against the unyielding chains, then fell limp, exhausted, 
expecting to die.
	The burn became a tingling, sweet sensation; Drizzt felt
stronger suddenly, and his vision returned as the swelling began to
subside from his eyes.
	The Baenre brothers stood before him.
	“Drizzt Do’Urden, ” Dantrag said evenly. “I have waited many
years to meet you."
	Drizzt had no reply.
	“Do you know me? Of me?” Dantrag asked.
	Again Drizzt did not speak, and this time his silence cost him a
slap across the face.
	“Do you know of me?” Dantrag asked more forcefully.
	Drizzt tried hard to remember the name Matron Baenre had
tagged on this one. He knew Berg’inyon from their years together at
the Academy and on patrol, but not this one; he couldn’t remember
the name. He did understand that this one’s ego was involved, and
that it would be wise to appease that false pride. He studied the
male’s outfit for just a moment, drawing what he hoped to be the
correct conclusion.
	“Weapon master of House Baenre, ” he slurred, blood following
every word from his battered mouth. He found that the sting of
those wounds was not so great now, as though they were quickly
healing, and he began to understand the nature of that potion that
had been forced down his throat.
	“Zak’nafein told you, then, of Dantrag, ” the male reasoned, 
puffing out his chest like a barnyard rooster.
	“Of course, ” Drizzt lied.
	“Then you know why I am here.”
	“No, ” Drizzt answered honestly, more than a little confused.
	Dantrag looked over his own shoulder, drawing Drizzt’s gaze
across the room to a pile of equipment, Drizzt’s equipment!, 
stacked neatly in a far corner.
	“For many years I desired a fight with Zak’nafein, ” Dantrag
explained, “to prove that I was the better. He was afraid of me and
would not come out of his hiding hole.”
	Drizzt resisted the urge to scoff openly; Zak’nafein had been
afraid of no one.
	“Now I have you, ” Dantrag went on.
	“To prove yourself?” Drizzt asked.
	Dantrag lifted a hand, as if to strike, but held his temper in
check.
	“We fight, and you kill me, and what does Matron Baenre say?”
Drizzt asked, understanding Dantrag’s dilemma. He had been cap 
tured for greater reasons than to appease the pride of an upstart
Baenre child. It all seemed like such a game suddenly, a game that
Drizzt had played before. When his sister had come to Mithril Hall
and captured him, part of her deal with her associate was to let the
man, Artemis Entreri, have his personal fight with Drizzt, for no
better reason than to prove himself.
	“The glory of my victory will forestall any punishments, ”
Dantrag replied casually, as though he honestly believed the claim.
“And perhaps I will not kill you. Perhaps I will maim you and drag
you back to your chains so that Vendes can continue her play. That
is why we gave you the potion. You will be healed, brought to the
brink of death, and healed again. It will go on for a hundred years, if
that is Matron Baenre’s will.”
	Drizzt remembered the ways of his dark people and did not
doubt the claim for a minute. He had heard whispers of captured
nobles, taken in some of the many interhouse wars, who were kept
for centuries as tortured slaves of the victorious houses.
	“Do not doubt that our fight will come, Drizzt Do’Urden, ”
Dantrag said. He put his face right up to Drizzt’s. “When you are
healed and able to defend yourself.” Faster than Drizzt’s eyes could
follow, Dantrag’s hands came up and slapped him alternately on
both cheeks. Drizzt had never seen such speed before and he
marked it well, suspecting that he would one day witness it again
under more dangerous circumstances.
	Dantrag spun on his heels and walked past Berg’inyon, toward
the door. The younger Baenre merely laughed at the hanging pris 
oner and spat in Drizzt’s face before following his brother.

	“So beautiful, ” the bald mercenary remarked, running his slen 
der fingers through Catti-brie’s thick tangle of auburn hair.
	Catti-brie did not blink; she just stared hard at the dimly lit, 
undeniably handsome figure. There was something different about
this drow, the perceptive young woman realized. She did not think
that he would force himself on her. Buried within Jarlaxle’s swash 
buckling facade was a warped sense of honor, but a definite code
nonetheless, somewhat like that of Artemis Entreri. Entreri had once
held Catti-brie as a prisoner for many days, and he had not placed a
hand on her except to prod her along the necessary course.
	So it was with Jarlaxle, Catti-brie believed, hoped. If the merce 
nary truly found her attractive, he would probably try to woo her, 
court her attention, at least for a while.
	“And your courage cannot be questioned, ” Jarlaxle continued in
his uncomfortably perfect surface dialect. “To come alone to Menzo 
berranzan!” The mercenary shook his head in disbelief and looked
to Entreri, the only other person in the small, square room. “Even
Artemis Entreri had to be coaxed here, and would leave, no doubt, if
he could find the way.
	“This is not a place for surface dwellers, ” Jarlaxle remarked. To
accentuate his point, the mercenary jerked his hand suddenly, again
taking the Cat’s Eye circlet from Catti-brie’s head. Blackness, deeper
than even the nights in the lowest of Bruenor’s mines, enveloped
her, and she had to fight hard to keep a wave of panic from over 
whelming her.
	Jarlaxle was right in front of her. She could feel him, feel his
breath, but all she saw was his red glowing eyes, sizing her up in
the infrared spectrum. Across the room, Entreri’s eyes likewise
glowed, and Catti-brie did not understand how he, a human, had
gained such vision.
	She dearly wished that she possessed it as well. The darkness
continued to overwhelm her, to swallow her. Her skin felt extra sen 
sitive; all her senses were on their very edge.
	She wanted to scream, but would not give her captors the satis 
faction.
	Jarlaxle uttered a word that Catti-brie did not understand, and
the room was suddenly bathed in soft blue light.
	“In here, you will see, ” Jarlaxle said to her. “Out there, beyond
your door, there is only darkness.” He teasingly held the circlet
before Catti-brie’s longing gaze, then dropped it into a pocket of his
breeches.
	“Forgive me, ” he said softly to Catti-brie, taking her off her
guard. “I do not wish to torment you, but I must maintain my secu 
rity. Matron Baenre desires you, quite badly I would guess, since
she keeps Drizzt as a prisoner, and knows that you would be a fine
way to gnaw at his powerful will.”
	Catti-brie did not hide her excitement, fleeting hope, at the
news that Drizzt was alive.
	“Of course they have not killed him, ” the mercenary went on, 
speaking as much to Entreri, the assassin realized, as to Catti-brie.
“He is a valuable prisoner, a wellspring of information, as they say
on the surface.”
	“They will kill him, ” Entreri remarked, somewhat angrily, 
Catti-brie had the presence of mind to note.
	“Eventually, ” Jarlaxle replied, and he chuckled. “But both of
you will probably be long dead of old age by then, and your chil 
dren as well. Unless they are half drow, ” he added slyly, tossing a
wink at Catti-brie.
	She resisted the urge to punch him in the eye.
	“It’s a pity, really, that events followed such a course, ” Jarlaxle
continued. “I did so wish to speak with the legendary Drizzt
Do’Urden before Baenre got him. If I had that spider mask in my
possession, I would go to the Baenre compound this very night, 
when the priestesses are at the high ritual, and sneak in for a talk
with him. Early in the ceremony, of course, in case Matron Baenre
decides to sacrifice him this very night. Ah, well.” He ended with a
sigh and a shrug and ran his gentle fingers through Catti-brie’s thick
hair one final time before he turned for the door.
	“I could not go anyway, ” he said to Entreri. “I must meet with
Matron Ker Horlbar to discuss the cost of an investigation.”
	Entreri only smiled in response to the pointedly cruel remark.
He rose as the mercenary passed, fell in behind Jarlaxle, then
stopped suddenly and looked back to Catti-brie.
	“I think I will stay and speak with her, ” the assassin said.
	“As you will, ” the mercenary replied, “but do not harm her. Or, 
if you do, ” he corrected with another chuckle, “at least do not scar
her beautiful features.”
	Jarlaxle walked out of the room and closed the door behind, 
then let his magical boots continue to click loudly as he walked
along the stone corridor, to let Entreri be confident that he had gone.
He felt in his pocket as he went, and smiled widely when he discov 
ered, to no surprise, that the circlet had just been taken.
	Jarlaxle had sown the seeds of chaos; now he could sit back and
watch the fruit of his labors grow.

Chapter 21
THE LAYERS
STRIPPED AWAY

	Catti-brie and Entreri spent a long moment staring at
each other, alone for the first time since her capture, in
the small room at Bregan D’aerthe’s secret complex. By
the expression on Entreri’s face, Catti-brie knew that he
was up to something.
	He held his hand up before him and shifted his fingers, and the
Cat’s Eye agate dropped to the end of its silver chain.
	Catti-brie stared at it curiously, unsure of the assassin’s motives.
He had stolen it from Jarlaxle’s pocket, of course, but why would he
risk a theft from so dangerous a dark elf?
	“Ye’re as much a prisoner as I am, ” Catti-brie finally reasoned.
“He’s got ye caught here to do his bidding.”
	“I do not like that word, ” Entreri replied, “prisoner. It implies a
helpless state, and I assure you, I am never helpless.”
	He was nine parts bravado, one part hope, Catti-brie knew, but
she kept the thought to herself.
	“And what are ye to do when Jarlaxle finds it missing?” she
asked.
	“I shall be dancing on the surface by that time, ” the assassin
replied coolly.
	Catti-brie studied him. There it was, spoken plainly and clearly, 
beyond intrigue. But why the circlet? she continued to wonder, and
then she grew suddenly afraid. Entreri may have decided that its
starlight was preferable to, or complementary to, his infravision. But
he would not have told her that he meant to go if he meant to leave
her behind, alive.
	“Ye do not need the thing, ” Catti-brie reasoned, trying to keep
her voice steady. “Ye’ve been given the infravision and can see yer
way well enough.”
	“But you need it, ” Entreri said, tossing the circlet to the young
woman. Catti-brie caught it and held it in her hands, trying to weigh
the consequences of putting it on.
	“I cannot lead ye to the surface, ” she said, thinking that the
assassin had miscalculated. “I found me way down only because I
had the panther and the locket showing me the way to follow
Drizzt.”
	The assassin didn’t blink.
	“I said I cannot lead ye out o’ here, ” Catti-brie reiterated.
	“Drizzt can, ” Entreri said. “I offer you a deal, one that you are in
no position to refuse. I will get both you and Drizzt out of Menzo 
berranzan, and you two will escort me back to the surface. Once
there, we go our separate ways, and may they stay separate through
all eternity.”
	Catti-brie took a long moment to digest the startling proposl 
tion. “Ye’re thinking that I’m to trust ye?” she asked, but Entreri
didn’t answer, didn’t have to answer. Catti-brie sat imprisoned in a
room surrounded by fierce drow enemies, and Drizzt’s predicament
was likely even worse. Whatever the evil Entreri might offer her, it
could be no worse than the alternatives.
	“What about Guenhwyvar?” Catti-brie asked. “And me bow?”
	“I’ve the bow and quiver, ” Entreri answered. “Jarlaxle has the
panther.”
	“I’ll not leave without Guenhwyvar, ” Catti-brie said.
	Entreri looked at her incredulously, as if he thought she were
bluffing.
	Catti-brie threw the circlet to his feet. She hopped up on the
edge of a small table and crossed her arms defiantly over her chest.
	Entreri looked down to the item, then to Catti-brie. “I could
make you leave, ” he promised.
	“If ye think ye could, then ye’re thinking wrong, ” Catti-brie
answered. “I’m guessing that ye’ll need me help and cooperation to
get through this place, and I’m not to give it to ye, not for meself and
not for Drizzt, without the cat.
	“And know ye that Drizzt will agree with me choice, ” Catti-brie
went on, hammering home the point. “Guenhwyvar ‘s a friend to us
both, and we’re not for leaving friends behind!”
	Entreri hooked his toe under a loop in the circlet and casually
flipped it across the room to Catti-brie, who caught it once more
and, this time, put it on her head. Without another word, the assas 
sin motioned for the woman to sit tight, and he abruptly left the
room.
	The single guard outside Jarlaxle’s private room showed little
interest in the approaching human; Entreri practically had to prod
the drow to get his attention. Then the assassin pointed to the
strange, flowing door and asked, “Jarlaxle?”
	The soldier shook his head.
	Entreri pointed again to the watery door, his eyes suddenly
popping wide with surprise. When the soldier leaned over to see
what was wrong, the assassin grabbed him across the shoulders and
heaved him through the portal, both of them slipping through, into
the watery corridor. Entreri tugged and twisted in a slow motion
wrestling match with the surprised drow. He was bigger than this
one, and equally agile, and gradually made progress in moving the
guard along.
	They plunged out the other side, falling into Jarlaxle’s room.
The drow went for his sword, but Entreri’s left hook staggered him.
A quick combination of punches followed, and when the drow went
down to one knee, the assassin’s foot slammed hard against his
cheek.
	Entreri half dragged, half carried the drow to the side of the
room, where he slammed him against the wall. He slugged him sev 
eral times to make sure that he would offer no further resistance.
Soon he had the dark elf helpless, down on his knees, barely con 
scious, with his hands tied behind his back and his mouth tightly
gagged. He pinned the drow against the wall and felt about for a
releasing mechanism. The door to a secret cubby slid open, and
Entreri forced the drow inside.
	Entreri considered whether or not to kill this one. On the one
hand, if he killed the drow, there would be no witnesses and Jarlaxle
would have to spend some time figuring out who had committed
the crime. Something held Entreri’s dagger hand in check, though, 
some instinct that told him to proceed with this operation cleanly, 
with no losses to Bregan D’aerthe.
	It was all too easy, Entreri realized when he found not only the
figurine of Guenhwyvar, but Catti-brie’s magical mask as well, 
waiting for him, yes, waiting for him!, on Jarlaxle’s desk. Entreri
picked them up gingerly, looking for some devious traps nearby
and checking to make sure that these were the genuine items.
	Something strange was going on.
	Entreri considered the not so subtle hints that Jarlaxle had been
dropping, the fact that the mercenary had taken him to Sorcere and
conveniently showed him the way to the spider mask. He reached
into a pocket and took out the magical locket of Alustriel, the hom 
ing beacon to Drizzt Do’Urden that Jarlaxle had casually tossed to
him. Jarlaxle had even managed to slip in the proper time for the
attempt, the early hours of the high ritual being celebrated at House
Baenre this very night.
	What was it all about? Entreri wondered. Jarlaxle had some pri 
vate agenda, one that apparently went against House Baenre’s
designs on Mithril Hall. Standing there in the mercenary’s office, it
seemed obvious to Entreri that Jarlaxle had set him up as a pawn.
	Entreri clutched the locket tightly, then thrust it back into his
pocket. Very well, he decided. He would be an effective pawn
indeed.
	Twenty minutes later, Entreri, using the magical mask to appear
as a drow soldier, and Catti-brie moved quietly and swiftly along
the winding ways of Menzoberranzan, cutting a northeastern path
along the stalagmite mounds, toward the higher level of Tier Breche
and the drow Academy.



	He saw again the tiered steps of the great dwarven Undercity, 
the heart of Mithril Hall. He imagined the entryway from the west 
ern gate, through Keeper’s Dale, and pictured again the great chasm
known as Garumn’s Gorge.
	Drizzt fought hard to warp those images, to distort the truth
about Mithril Hall, but the details were so clear to him! It was as if
he were there again, walking freely beside Bruenor and the others.
In the throes of the mind flayer’s hypnosis, Drizzt found himself
overwhelmed. He had no more barriers to stack against the mental
intrusion of Matron Baenre’s pet, no more willpower against the
mental giant.
	As the images came to Drizzt, he felt them stripped away, men 
tally scraped from his brain, like so much food for the wretched
illithid. Each intrusion burned painfully, shot electrical shocks along
the synaptical connections of the drow ranger’s mind.
	Finally Drizzt felt the creature’s insidious tentacles loosening
their grip on the skin of his forehead, and he slumped, his mind a
jumble of confusing images and his head throbbing with agony.
	“We have gained some information this day, ” he heard the distant, 
watery voice say
	Gained some information...
	The words rang over and over ominously in Drizzt’s mind. The
illithid and Matron Baenre were still talking, but he was not listen 
ing, concentrating on those three words, remembering the implica 
tions of those three terrible words.
	Drizzt’s lavender orbs slipped open, but he kept his head
bowed, covertly peeking at Methil. The creature had its back to him, 
was only a couple of feet away
	The illithid now knew part of the layout of Mithril Hall, and its
continuous intrusions into Drizzt’s mind would soon show it the
entire complex.
	Drizzt could not let that happen; slowly the drow’s hands
clenched more tightly on the chains.
	Drizzt’s bare foot came up, his heel slamming the wretched
creature’s spongy head. Before Methil could move away, the ranger
wrapped his legs about Methil’s neck in a choke hold and began
thrashing back and forth, trying to snap the thing’s neck.
	Drizzt felt the tentacles probing for his skin, felt them boring
into his legs, but he fought away his revulsion and thrashed wildly
He saw wicked Vendes coming around the side and knew what
would come, but he concentrated on his task. For the sake of his
friends, Methil had to be killed!
	The illithid threw its weight straight back, trying to confuse
Drizzt and break the hold, but the skilled drow ranger turned with
the move and Methil fell to the ground, half slumped against the
wall and half held aloft by Drizzt’s strong hold. Drizzt heaved him
up and slammed him back, releasing the ineffective choke. Illithids
were not physically imposing creatures, and Methil raised his three 
fingered hands pitifully, trying to fend the sudden barrage of
stomping feet.
	Something hard slammed Drizzt at the base of his ribs, stealing
his breath. He stubbornly continued to stomp, but was slammed
again, then a third time and a fourth.
	Hanging limply from the chains, the ranger tried to curl up to
protect the area as Vendes hammered away Drizzt thought that he
was surely dead when he looked into the furious eyes of wicked
Duk Tak, which were filled with a mixture of venom and hatred and
ecstacy, as she was allowed to vent that perpetual fury
	She stopped, sooner than Drizzt dared to hope, and calmly
walked away, leaving Drizzt hanging from the shackles, trying to
curl but unable to find the strength.
	Methil had joined Matron Baenre, who sat comfortably on her
driftdisk, and was looking back at Drizzt with his pupilless, milky
white eyes.
	Drizzt knew that the next time the illithid encroached on his
mind, Methil would go out of his way to make the pain even more
intense.
	“No potion for him, ” Matron Baenre instructed Dantrag, standing
impassively by the door. Dantrag followed his mother’s gaze to sev 
eral flasks along the wall to Drizzt’s left and nodded.
	“Dobluth, ” she said to Drizzt, using the derisive drow word for
outcast. “The high ritual will be better served with our knowledge
that you are here in agony.” She nodded to Vendes, who wheeled
about, hurling a small dart as she turned.
	It caught Drizzt in the stomach, and he felt a small but stinging
pinch. Then his entire belly felt as if it had ignited into roaring fires.
He gagged, tried to scream, then sheer agony gave him the strength
to curl up. The change in posture didn’t help. The magical little dart
continued to pump its droplets of poison into him, continued to
burn at his insides.
	Through tear filled eyes, Drizzt saw the driftdisk slide from his
cell, Vendes and Methil obediently following Matron Baenre.
Dantrag, expressionless, remained leaning against the doorjamb for
some time, then walked over near Drizzt.
	Drizzt forced himself to stop screaming, and merely groaned
and grunted through gritted teeth with the weapon master standing
so close to him.
	“You are a fool, ” Dantrag said. “If your attempts force my
mother to kill you before I get the chance, I promise you that I will
personally torture and slaughter every living creature that calls
itself a friend of Drizzt Do’Urden!”
	Again with speed that defied Drizzt’s vision, Dantrag smacked
Drizzt across the face. The ranger hung limp for just a second, then
was forced to curl up again as the fiery explosions of the poisoned
dart erupted across his stomach.



	Out of sight, around the corner at the base of the wide stairs lead 
ing to TIer Breche, Artemis Entreri tried hard to recall an image of
Gromph Baenre, the archmage of the city. He had seen Gromph only a
few times, mostly while spying for Jarlaxle. (Jarlaxle had thought that
the archmage was shortening the nights in Menzoberranzan by
lighting the lingering heat fires in the time clock of Narbondel a few
instants too soon, and was interested in what the dangerous wizard
might be up to, and so he had sent Entreri to spy on the drow.)
	Entreri’s cloak changed to the flowing robes of the wizard; his
hair became thicker and longer, a great white mane, and subtle, 
barely visible wrinkles appeared about his eyes.
	“I cannot believe ye’re trying this, ” Catti-brie said to him when
he moved out of the shadows.
	“The spider mask is in Gromph’s desk, ” the assassin answered
coldly, not thrilled with the prospects either. “There is no other way
into House Baenre.”
	“And if this Gromph is sitting at his desk?”
	“Then you and I will be scattered all over the cavern, ” Entreri
answered gruffly, and he swept by the young woman, grabbed her
hand, and pulled her up the wide stairway
	Entreri was counting as much on luck as on skill. He knew that
Sorcere, the school of wizards, was full of reclusive masters who
generally stayed out of each other’s way, and he could only hope
that Gromph, though only a male, had been invited to House
Baenre’s high ritual. The walls of the secretive place were protected
against scrying and against teleportation, and if his disguise worked
against whatever magical barriers might be in place, he should be
able to get in and out of Gromph’s room without too much interfer 
ence. The city’s archmage was known as a surly one, with a violent
temper; no one got in Gromph’s way
	At the top of the stairway, on the level of Tier Breche, the com 
panions saw the three structures of the drow Academy. To their
right was the plain, pyramidal structure of Melee Magthere, the
school of fighters. Directly ahead loomed the most impressive struc 
ture, the great spider shaped building of Arach Tinilith, the school
of Lloth. Entreri was glad that he did not have to try to enter either
of those buildings. Melee Magthere was a place of swarming
guardsmen and tight control, and Arach Tinilith was protected by
the high priestesses of Lloth, working in concert for the good of
their Spider Queen. Only the gracefully spired structure to the left, 
Sorcere, was secretive enough to penetrate.
	Catti-brie pulled her arm away and nearly bolted in sheer terror.
She had no disguise and felt totally vulnerable up here. The young
woman found her courage, though, and did not resist when Entreri
roughly grabbed her arm once more and tugged her along at a great
pace.
	They walked into Sorcere’s open front doorway, where two
guards promptly blocked their way One started to ask Entreri a
question, but the assassin slapped him across the face and pushed
past, hoping that Gromph’s cruel reputation would get them
through.
	The bluff worked, and the guards went back to their posts, not
even daring to mutter to themselves until the archmage was far
away
	Entreri remembered the twisting ways perfectly and soon came
to the plain wall flanking Gromph’s private chambers. He took a
deep breath and looked to his companion, silently reiterating his
feelings that if Gromph was behind this door, they were both surely
dead.
	“Kolsen’shea orbb, ” the assassin whispered. To Entreri’s relief, the
wall began to stretch and twist, becoming a spiderweb. The strands
rotated, leaving the hole and revealing the soft blue glow, and
Entreri quickly (before he lost his nerve) rushed through and pulled
Catti-brie in behind him.
	Gromph was not inside.
	Entreri made for the dwarf bone desk, rubbing his hands
together and blowing in them before reaching for the appropriate
drawer. Catti-brie, meanwhile, intrigued by the obviously magical
paraphernalia, walked about, eyeing parchments (from a distance), 
even going over to one ceramic bottle and daring to pop off its cork.
	Entreri’s heart leaped into his throat when he heard the arch 
mage’s voice, but he relaxed when he realized that it came from the
bottle.
	Catti-brie looked at the bottle and the cork curiously, then
popped the cork back on, eliminating the voice. “What was that?”
she asked, not understanding a word of the Drow language.
	“I know not, ” Entreri replied harshly “Do not touch anything!”
	Catti-brie shrugged as the assassin went back to his work on the
desk, trying to make sure that he uttered the password for the
drawer perfectly He recalled his conversation with Jarlaxle, when
the mercenary had given him the word. Had Jarlaxle been honest, or
was this whole thing part of some elaborate game? Had Jarlaxle
baited him to this place, so that he might speak some false word, 
open the drawer, and destroy himself and half of Sorcere? It
occurred to Entreri that Jarlaxle might have put a phony replica of
the spider mask in the drawer, then tricked Entreri into coming here
and setting off Gromph’s powerful wards, thus destroying the evi 
dence.
	Entreri shook the disturbing thoughts away He had committed
himself to this course, had convinced himself that his attempt to free
Drizzt was somehow part of the framework of Jarlaxle’s grand
plans, whatever they might be, and he could not surrender to his
fears now. He uttered the phrase and pulled open the drawer.
	The spider mask was waiting for him.
	Entreri scooped it up and turned to Catti-brie, who had filled
the top of a small hourglass with fine white sand and was watching
it slip away with the moments. Entreri leaped from the dwarf bone
desk and scrambled across the room, tipping the item to the side.
	Catti-brie eyed him curiously
	“I was keeping the time, ” she said calmly
	“This is no timepiece!” the assassin roughly explained. He
tipped the hourglass upside down and carefully removed the sand, 
replacing it in its packet and gently resealing it. “It is an explosive, 
and when the sand runs out, all the area bursts into flame. You must
not touch anything!” he scolded harshly. “Gromph will not even
know that we have been here if all is in proper order.” Entreri
looked around at the jumbled room as he spoke. “Or, at least, in
proper disorder. He was not here when Jarlaxle returned the spider
mask.”
	Catti-brie nodded and appeared genuinely ashamed, but it was
only a facade. The young woman had suspected the general, if not
the exact, nature of the hourglass all along, and would not have let
the sand rim out. She had only started it running to get some confir 
mation from the worldly Entreri.
	The two quickly departed the wizard’s room and Sorcere. Catti 
brie did not let on that she had several more of those dangerous
hourglasses, and their corresponding packets of detonating sand, 
tucked into a belt pouch.

Chapter 22
BREAK IN


	Qu’ellarz’orl, the plateau occupied by some of the proud 
est noble houses, was strangely quiet. Entreri, appear 
ing as a common drow soldier again, and Catti-brie
made their silent and inconspicuous way along the
great mushroom grove, toward the twenty foot high spiderweb
fence surrounding the Baenre compound.
	Panic welled in both the companions and neither said a thing, 
forced themselves to concentrate on the stakes in this game: ulti 
mate victory or ultimate loss.
	Crouched in the shadows behind a stalagmite, the two watched
as a grand procession, led by several priestesses sitting atop blue 
glowing driftdisks, made its way through the open compound and
toward the great doors of the huge central chapel. Entreri recog 
nized Matron Baenre and knew that some of the others near her
were probably her daughters. He watched the many disks curiously, 
coming to understand that matron mothers of other houses were in
the procession.
	It was a high ritual, as Jarlaxle had said, and Entreri snickered at
how completely the sly mercenary had arranged all of this.
	“What is it?” Catti-brie asked, not understanding the private
joke.
	Entreri shook his head and scowled, indicating that the trouble 
some young woman should shut her mouth. Catti-brie bit her bot 
tom lip and did not spew the many venomous replies she had in
mind. She needed Entreri now, and he needed her; their personal
hatred would have to wait.
	And wait is exactly what Catti-brie and Entreri did. They squat 
ted behind the mound for many minutes as the long procession
gradually disappeared into the domed chapel. Entreri figured that
many more than a thousand drow, maybe even two thousand, had
gone into the structure, and few soldiers, or lizard riders, could now
be seen from his position.
	Another benefit of their timing soon showed itself as songs to
Lloth filtered out of the chapel’s doors, filling the air about the com 
pound.
	“The cat?” Entreri whispered to Catti-brie.
	Catti-brie felt the statuette in her pouch and considered the
question, then looked doubtfully at the Baenre web fence. “When
we get over, ” she explained, though she had no idea of how Entreri
meant to pass that seemingly impenetrable barrier. The strands of
the fence were as thick as Catti-brie’s forearm.
	Entreri nodded his agreement and took out the black velvet spi 
der mask and slipped it over his head. Catti-brie couldn’t contain a
shudder as she regarded the assassin, his head now resembling
some grotesque caricature of a huge spider.
	“I will warn you only once, ” the assassin whispered. “You are a
merciful one, foolishly so, but there is no place for mercy in the
realm of the drow. Do not think to wound or knock unconscious any
opponents we cross. Go for the kill.”
	Catti-brie didn’t bother to reply, and if Entreri could see into the
fires raging inside the young woman, he would not have bothered
to utter the remark.
	He motioned for her to follow, then picked his careful way from
shadow to shadow to the base of the fence.
	Entreri touched the strands tentatively, making certain that his
fingers would not stick, then he took a firm hold and bade Catti-brie
to climb on his back.
	“Take care that you do not touch the fence!” he warned. “Else I
will have to remove whatever limb you have stuck.”
	Catti-brie gingerly took hold of the evil man, wrapping her
arms about his chest, one over one shoulder, the other under
Entreri’s arm. She clasped her hands tightly and squeezed with all
her strength.
	Entreri was not a big man, not forty pounds heavier than Catti 
brie herself, but he was strong, his muscles honed for fighting, and
he easily began his ascent, keeping his body as far from the danger 
ous fence as possible so that the young woman’s hands did not get
entangled. The trickiest part came at the top of the barrier, particu 
larly when Entreri spotted a couple of lizard riding soldiers
approaching.
	“Do not even breathe, ” he warned Catti-brie, and he inched
along the top rim of the fence to take as much cover as possible in
the shadows of an anchoring stalagmite post.
	If there had been no lights in the Baenre compound, the two
surely would been caught, their warm forms showing distinctively
against the cooler stone of the mound. But lights were on, including
many burning torches, and the Baenre soldiers were not using their
infravision as they walked their posts. They passed by the fence no
more than a dozen feet from the two intruders, but so adept at hid 
ing in the shadows was Artemis Entreri that they never noticed the
strange jut in the previously smooth stalagmite.
	When they were gone, Entreri pulled himself to a standing posi 
tion atop the fence and twisted to the side, so that Catti-brie could
brace herself against the mound. He had only intended to take a
short rest, but the young woman, desperate to be on with things, 
unexpectedly shifted off his back, onto the mound, and half slid, 
half climbed down its back side, coming to a roll in the Baenre com 
pound.
	Entreri hustled down the fence to join her, snapped off the
mask, and glared at her, thinking her actions rash and stupid.
	Catti-brie did not retreat from that look, just eyed the hated
assassin dangerously and mouthed, “Where?”
	Entreri slipped a hand into one pocket and felt for the magical
locket, then turned about, facing different directions until the item
seemed most warm. He had guessed Drizzt’s location before the
locket had even confirmed it: the great mound, the best guarded
position in the entire compound.
	They could only hope that most of Baenre’s elite soldiers were
attending the high ritual.
	Crossing the compound to the elaborate structure was not diffi 
cult, for few guards were apparent, the shadows were many, and the
singing emanating from the chapel amply covered any noise. No
house would expect an attack, or dare to invoke the Spider Queen’s
anger by launching an attack, during a high ritual, and since the
only possible threat to House Baenre was from another drow house, 
security in the compound was not at its highest point.
	“In there, ” Entreri whispered as he and Catti-brie came flat
against the walls flanking the doorway to the huge, hollowed sta 
lagmite. Gently, Entreri touched the stone door to try to discern any
traps (though he figured that any traps would be magical in nature
and he would find them when they blew up in his face). To his sur 
prise, the portal suddenly rose, disappearing into a crack in the top
of the jamb and revealing a narrow, dimly lit corridor.
	He and Catti-brie exchanged doubtful looks, and after a long, 
silent pause, both stepped in together, and both nearly fell over
with relief when they realized that they were still alive in the corri 
dor.
	Their relief was not long lived, however, for it was stolen by a
guttural call, a question, perhaps. Before the pair could decipher
any of the words, the form of a huge, muscular humanoid, easily
seven feet tall and as wide as the five foot corridor, stepped into the
other end, almost completely stealing the diminutive light. The crea 
ture’s sheer bulk, and its distinctive, bull like head, revealed its
identity
	Catti-brie nearly jumped out of her boots when the door slid
closed behind her.
	The minotaur grunted the question again, in the Drow tongue.
	“He’s asking for a password, ” Entreri whispered to Catti-brie. “I
think.”
	“So give it to him.”
	Easier said than done, Entreri knew well, for Jarlaxle had never
mentioned any password to the inner Baenre structures. Entreri
would have to take issue with the mercenary over that small slip, he
decided, if he ever got the chance.
	The monstrous minotaur advanced a threatening step, waving a
spiked adamantite rod out in front of it.
	“As if minotaurs aren’t formidable enough without giving them
drow made weapons, ” Entreri whispered to Catti-brie.
	Another step put the minotaur barely ten feet from the compan 
ions.
	“Uss tan be~bo1... uss tan belbau ulu. . . dos, ” Entreri stuttered, and
he jingled a pouch on his belt. “Dosst?”
	The minotaur stopped its advance and screwed up its bullish
features.
	“What did you say?” Catti-brie whispered.
	“I have no idea, ” Entreri admitted, though he thought he had
mentioned something about a gift.
	A low snarl emitted from the increasingly impatient minotaur
guard’s mouth.
	“Dosst?” Catti-brie asked boldly, holding out her bow in one
hand and trying to appear cheerful. She smiled widely and bobbed
her head stupidly, as though offering the bow, all the while slipping
her other hand inside the folds of her traveling cloak, feeling for an
arrow in the quiver at her hip.
	“Dosst?” she asked again, and the minotaur poked itself in the
chest with a huge, stubby finger.
	“Yeah, yerself!” Catti-brie growled, and out snapped the arrow, 
fitted to the string and fired before the stupid minotaur even got its
back down. The arrow slammed into the monster’s chest and sent it
staggering backward.
	“Use yer finger to fill the hole!” Catti-brie roared, fitting another
arrow. “And how many fingers ye got?”
	She glanced quickly to Entreri, who was staring at her dumb 
foundedly Catti-brie laughed at him and put another arrow into the
monster’s chest, driving it back several more steps, where it toppled
into the wider room beyond the corridor. When it fell, more than
half a dozen other minotaurs were ready to take its place.
	“You are crazy!” Entreri shouted at the woman.
	Not bothering to answer, Catti-brie slammed an arrow into the
closest minotaur’s belly. It doubled over in pain and was plowed
under by its charging comrades.
	Entreri drew out his blades and met the charge, realizing that he
had to keep the giants away from Catti-brie so that she might utilize
her bow. He met the first minotaur two steps in from the end of the
corridor, throwing his sword up to deflect a blow from the crea 
ture’s spiked rod (and the assassin’s whole side tingled with numb 
ness from the sheer weight of the blow).
	Much quicker than the lumbering giant, Entreri countered with
three rapid dagger strikes to the monster’s midsection. Down
swooped the spiked rod, and, though his sword intercepted the
blow, Entreri had to spin a complete circuit to absorb the shock and
get out of harm’s way
	He came around with his sword leading, its green glowing
point cutting a neat line under the minotaur’s jaw, slicing through
bone and the creature’s cowlike tongue.
	Blood spewed from the beast’s mouth, but it swung again, for 
cing Entreri back.
	A, silver streak stole the sight from both combatants as Catti 
brie’s arrow flew over the engaged minotaur ‘s shoulder to drive
into the thick skull of the next creature in line.
	Entreri could only hope that the minotaur was similarly blinded
as he made his desperate rush, jabbing viciously with his dagger, 
cutting his sword in a brutal downward slash. He scored lightning 
fast hit after hit on the stunned and wounded beast, and his sight
returned as the minotaur slumped down in front of him.
	Entreri didn’t hesitate. He sprang right atop the thing’s back, 
then leaped farther along to the back of the next dead beast, using
its bulk to bring him up even with the next monster in line. His
sword beat the minotaur to the attack, scoring a solid hit on the crea 
ture’s shoulder. Entreri thought this one an easy kill as its weapon
arm inevitably slumped useless at its side, but he had never fought
the likes of a bull headed minotaur before, and his surprise was
complete when the creature snapped a head butt that caught him in
the chest.
	The minotaur jerked to the side and began a charge across the
room, still carrying the assassin between its horns.
	“Oh, damn, ” Catti-brie muttered as she saw the line between
her and the remaining monsters suddenly open. She dropped to one
knee and began frantically tearing out her arrows and launching
them down the corridor.
	The blinding barrage dropped one, then two minotaurs, but the
third in line grabbed the falling second and hoisted it up as a shield.
Catti-brie managed to skip an arrow off that one’s thick head, but it
did no real damage and the minotaur rapidly closed.
	The young woman fired off one more shot, as much to blind
the monsters as in any hope of stopping the charge, then she dove
to the floor and boldly scrambled ahead, sliding aside the tram 
pling legs.
	The minotaur crashed hard into the outer door. Holding its
dead comrade in front of it, it could not tell that Catti-brie had
slipped away, and it heaved the huge corpse back from the wall and
slammed it in again repeatedly
	Still on the floor, Catti-brie had to pick her way past three sets of
treelike legs. All three minotaurs were roaring, offering some cover, 
for they thought that the one in front was squashing the puny
woman.
	She almost made it.
	The last minotaur in line felt a brush against its leg and looked
down, then bellowed and grabbed its spiked rod in both hands.
	Catti-brie rolled to her back, her bow coming out in front. Some 
how she got off a shot, knocking the creature back for just an instant.
The woman instinctively threw her feet straight up and over her, 
launching herself into a backward roll.
	The blinded minotaur’s rod took a fair sized chunk out of the
stone floor an inch below Catti-brie’s angled back.
	Catti-brie came right to her feet, facing the beast. She whipped
her bow across in front of her and spun away, stumbling out of the
corridor.
	The breath was taken from his body with the impact. The mino 
taur wrapped its good arm about Entreri’s waist, holding him
steady, and hopped back, obviously meaning to slam the assassin
into the wall once more. Just a few feet away, another minotaur
cheered its winning comrade on.
	Entreri’s dagger arm pumped wildly, futilely trying to penetrate
the beast’s thick skull.
	The assassin felt as though his backbone had shattered when
they hit the wall a second time. He forced himself to see through the
pain and the fear, forced himself to take a quick survey of his situa 
tion. A cool head was the fighter’s best advantage, Entreri knew, 
and his tactics quickly changed. Instead of just smashing the dagger
down against solid bone, he placed its tip on the flesh between the
creature’s bull horns, then ran it down the side of the minotaur’s
face, applying equal pressure to slide it and push it in.
	They hit the wall again.
	Entreri held his hand steady, confident that the dagger would
do its work. At first, the blade slipped evenly, not able to penetrate, 
but then it found a fleshy spot and Entreri immediately changed its
angle and plunged it home.
	Into the minotaur’s eye.
	The assassin felt the hungry dagger grab at the creature’s life
force, felt it pulse, sending waves of strength up his arm.
	The minotaur shuddered for a long while, holding steady
against the wall. Its watching comrade continued to cheer, thinking
that it was making mush of the human.
	Then it fell dead, and Entreri, light footed, hit the ground run 
ning, coming up into the other’s chest before it could react. He
launched a one two three combination, sword dagger sword, in the
blink of an eye.
	The surprised minotaur fell back, but Entreri paced it, keeping
his dagger firmly embedded, drawing out, feeding on this one’s
energy as well. The dying creature tried a lame swing with its club, 
but Entreri’s sword easily parried.
	And his dagger feasted.
	She came into the small room running, spun a half circle as she
fell to one knee. There was no need to aim, Catti-brie knew, for the
bulk of the pursuing minotaurs fully filled the corridor.
	The closest one was not at full speed, fortunately, having an
arrow driven halfway through its inner thigh. The wounded mino 
taur was a stubborn one, though, taking brutal hit after hit and still
coming on.
	Behind the beast, the next minotaur screamed frantically for the
third, the one pressing a corpse against the wall, to go the other way
But minotaurs were never known for intelligence, and the last in
line insisted that it had the human pinned and squashed.
	The last arrow was point blank, its tip, as it left Taulmaril, only
half a foot from the charging creature’s nose. It split the nostrils and
the skull, nearly halving the stubborn minotaur’s head. The creature
was dead instantly, but its momentum carried it on, bowling over
Catti-brie.
	She wasn’t badly injured, but there was no way that she could
extract her body and bow in time to stop the second charging mino 
taur, just coming out of the corridor.
	A sliding figure cut across the monster’s path, slashing and jab 
bing, and when the blur had passed, the minotaur stood in a crouch
and grabbed at its torn knees. It lumbered to the side in pursuit of
this newest foe, but Entreri spun up to his feet and easily danced
away
	He ran to the center of the room, behind a black marble pillar, 
and the minotaur followed, leaning forward. Entreri went around, 
and the minotaur, thinking quickly (for a minotaur), allowed itself
to fall into a staggered run, hooked one arm about the pillar, and
used its momentum to whip around.
	Entreri had thought quicker. As soon as he knew that he was
out of the minotaur’s line of sight, he stopped his rush about the pil 
lar and took a couple of steps back. The spinning minotaur rolled
right in between the assassin and the pillar, affording Entreri a
dozen clean jabs at its side and back.
	Artemis Entreri never needed that many
	The minotaur hoisted its dead companion and jumped back
three steps, then roared ahead, slamming the thing against the outer
stone door.
	An enchanted arrow sizzled into its back.
	“Huh?” it asked and tried to turn.
	A second arrow blew into its side, collapsing a lung.
	“Huh?” it asked breathlessly, stupidly, finally turning enough to
see Catti-brie, standing at the end of the corridor, grim faced and
with that wicked bow out in front of her.
	The third arrow blew into the side of the minotaur’s face. The
beast took a step forward, but the fourth arrow slammed it in the
chest, knocking it back against its dead comrade.
	“Huh?”
	It got hit five more times, and didn’t feel any of them, before
Entreri could get to Catti-brie and tell her that the fight was over.
	“We are fortunate that there were no drow about, ” the assassin
explained, looking nervously to the twelve doors and alcoves lining
this circular room. He felt for the locket in his pouch, then turned to
the floor to ceiling central pillar.
	Without a word of explanation, the assassin ran to the pillar.
Sensitive fingers rubbed against its smooth surface.
	“What do ye know?” Catti-brie asked when Entreri’s hands
stopped moving and he turned and smiled her way She asked again
and, in response, the assassin pushed on the stone, and a portion of
the marble slid away, revealing that this pillar was hollow. Entreri
went in, pulling Catti-brie along with him, and the door closed of its
own accord behind them.
	“What is it?” Catti-brie demanded, thinking that they had just
gone into a closet. She looked to the hole in the ceiling to her left, 
and the one in the floor to her right.
	Entreri didn’t answer. Following the locket’s pull, he inched
over to the hole in the floor, then crouched to one knee and peered
down it.
	Catti-brie slid down beside him, looking to him curiously when
she saw no ladder. Then she looked around the unremarkable
marble room, searching for some place to set a rope.
	“Perhaps there is a foothold, ” Entreri remarked, and he slid
over the edge, easing himself down the shaft. His expression
became incredulous as he felt the weight lifted from his body, felt
himself floating in midair.
	“What is it?” Catti-brie asked impatiently, seeing the amazed
look.
	Entreri lifted his hands from the floor, held them wide, and
smiled smugly as he gently descended. Catti-brie was into the hole
right behind him, floating freely, gently descending through the
darkness. Catti-brie noticed Entreri below her, replacing the magical
mask of disguise now, and concentrating.
	“You are my prisoner, ” the assassin said coldly, and for an
instant, Catti-brie did not understand, thought that Entreri had
double crossed her. As she came down to the floor beside him, the
assassin motioned for Taulmaril, and she recognized his intentions.
	“The bow, ” Entreri said impatiently
	Catti-brie stubbornly shook her head, and the assassin knew her
better than to argue the point. He moved to the closest wall and
began feeling about, and soon had the door to this level open. Two
drow males were waiting for them, hand crossbows up and ready, 
and Catti-brie wondered if she had been wise in holding fast to her
bow.
	How quickly those crossbows (and two drow jaws) dropped
when the guards saw Triel Baenre standing before them!
	Entreri roughly grabbed Catti-brie and pulled her forward.
	“Drizzt Do’Urden!” he cried in Triel’s voice.
	The guards wanted no argument with the eldest Baenre daugh 
ter. Their orders said nothing about escorting Triel, or anyone other
than Matron Baenre, to the valuable Drizzt, but their orders had
mentioned nothing about any human female prisoners. One scram 
bled ahead, while the other rushed to grab Catti-brie.
	The young woman slumped, dropping her bow, and forcing one
of the dark elves and Entreri to support her, one under each arm.
The other drow quickly retrieved Taulmaril, and Catti-brie couldn’t
help a slight wince in seeing the magnificent weapon in the hands of
an evil creature.
	They walked along a dark corridor, past several iron bound
doors. The drow in front stopped before one of these and took out a
tiny rod. He rubbed it down a metal plate beside the door handle, 
then tapped the plate twice. The door popped open.
	The leading drow started to turn, smiling as though he was
grateful to please Triel. Entreri’s hand slapped across his mouth, 
jerking his head back and to the side, and the assassin’s dagger
hand followed swiftly, the blade plunging through the stunned
drow’s throat.
	Catti-brie’s assault was not as skilled, but even more brutal. She
pivoted on one foot, her other leg flying high to slam the drow in
the belly as they crashed against the wall. Catti-brie hopped back
half a step and snapped her head forward, her forehead splattering
the drow’s delicate nose.
	A flurry of punches followed, another knee to the belly, and
Catti-brie wrestled her opponent into the room. She came up behind
the drow, lifting him from the floor, with her arms wrapped under
the drow’s armpits and her fingers clenched tightly behind his neck.
	The drow thrashed wildly but could not break the hold. Entreri
was in by then, and had dropped the corpse to the side.
	“No mercy!” Catti-brie growled through clenched teeth.
	Entreri calmly walked over. The drow kicked out, banging his
foot off Entreri’s blocking forearm.
	“Triel!” the confused soldier cried.
	Entreri stepped back, smiled, and took off the mask, and as an
expression of horror widened over the helpless drow’s face, Entreri
whipped a dagger into his heart.
	Catti-brie felt the dark elf jerk, then go limp. A sick feeling
washed over her, but it did not take hold as she glanced to the side
and saw Drizzt, beaten and chained. He hung from the wall, groan 
ing and trying futilely to curl up into a ball. Catti-brie dropped the
dead drow to the floor and ran to her dear friend, immediately
noticing the small but obviously wicked dart protruding from his
stomach.
	“I’ve got to take it!” she said to Drizzt, hoping that he would
agree. He was beyond reason, though; she didn’t think he even real 
ized that she was in the room.
	Entreri came up beside her. He gave only a slight glance at the
dart, more concerned with the bindings holding Drizzt.
	With a quick puff of steadying breath, Catti-brie took hold of the
nasty dart and tugged it free.
	Drizzt curled and gave a sharp cry of pain, then fell limp, 
unconscious.
	“There are no locks to pick!” Entreri snarled, seeing that the
shackles were solid rings.
	“Move away, ” came Catti-brie’s instructions as she ran out from
the wall. When Entreri turned to regard her, he saw the woman lift 
ing her deadly bow and promptly skittered to the side.
	Two shots took out the chains, and Drizzt fell, to be caught by
Entreri. The wounded ranger somehow managed to open one
swollen eye. He could hardly comprehend what was happening, 
didn’t know if these were friends or foes.
	“The flasks, ” he begged.
	Catti-brie looked about and spotted the rows of bottles resting
against the wall. She rushed over, found a full one, and brought it to
Drizzt.
	“He should not be alive, ” Entreri reasoned when she came up
with the foul smelling liquid. “His scars are too many Something
has sustained him.”
	Catti-brie looked doubtfully at the flask.
	The assassin followed her gaze and nodded. “Do it!” he com 
manded, knowing that they would never get Drizzt out of the
Baenre compound in this condition.
	Catti-brie shoved the flask against Drizzt’s lips and forced his
head back, compelled him to take a huge swallow. He sputtered and
spat, and for a moment, the young woman feared that she had poi 
soned or drowned her dearest friend.
	“How are you here?” Drizzt asked, both eyes suddenly wide, as
the strength began to flow through his body Still, the drow could
not support himself and his breath was dangerously shallow.
	Catti-brie ran over to the wall and came back with several more
flasks, sniffing them first to make sure that they smelled the same, 
then pouring them down Drizzt’s throat. In just a few minutes, the
ranger was standing solidly, looking more than a little amazed to
see his dearest friend and his worst enemy standing before him side
by side.
	“Your equipment, ” Entreri remarked, roughly turning Drizzt
about to see the pile.
	Drizzt looked more to Entreri than to the pile, wondering what
macabre game the evil assassin was playing. When Entreri noticed
the expression, the two enemies locked unblinking stares.
	“We’ve not the time!” Catti-brie called harshly
	“I thought you dead, ” Drizzt said.
	“You thought wrong, ” Entreri answered evenly Never blinking, 
he stepped past Drizzt and lifted the suit of chain, holding it out for
the following drow.
	“Watch the corridor, ” Entreri said to Catti-brie. The young
woman turned that way just as the iron bound door swung in.
	Turned that way to look down the length of Vendes Baenre’s
wand.

Part 5
EYE OF A WARRIOR
Courage.
	In any language, the word has a special ring to it, as
much, I suspect, from the reverent way in which it is spoken
as from the actual sounds of the letters. Courage. The word
evokes images of great deeds and great character: the grim set of the faces of
men defending their town’s walls from raiding goblins; the resilience of a
mother caring for young children when all the world has seemingly turned
hostile. In many of the larger cities of the Realms, young waifs stalk the
streets, without parents, without homes. Theirs is a unique courage, a
braving of hardships both physical and emotional.
	I suspect that Artemis Ent reri fought such a battle in the mud filled
lanes of Calim port. On one level, he certainly won, certainly overcame any
physical obstacles and rose to a rank of incredible power and respect.
	On another level, Artemis Entreri surely lost. What might he have
been, I often wonder, ~f his heart had not been so tainted? But I do not mis 
take my curiosity for pity. Entreri’s odds were no greater than my own. He
could have won out over his struggles, in body and in heart.
	I thought myself courageous, altruistic, when I left Mithril Hall deter 
mined to end the threat to my friends. I thought I was offering the supreme
sacr~fice for the good of those dear to me.
	When Catti-brie entered my cell in House Baenre, when, through half 
closed eyes, I glimpsed her fair and deceivingly delicate features, I learned
the truth. I did not understand my own motivations when I walked from
Mithril Hall. I was too full of unknown grief to recognize my own resigna 
tion. I was not courageous when I walked into the Underdark, because, in
the deepest corner of my heart, I felt as if I had nothing to lose. I had not
allowed myself to grieve for Wulfgar, and that emptiness stole my will and
my trust that things could be put aright.
	Courageous people do not surrender hope.
	Similarly, Artemis Entreri was not courageous when he came with
Catti-brie to rescue me. His actions were wrought of sheer desperation, for
if he remained in Menzoberranzan, he was surely doomed. Entreri’s goals, 
as always, were purely selfish. By his rescue attempt he made a conscious
choice that coming after me was his best chance for survival. The rescue
was an act of calculation, not of courage.
	By the time Catti-brie had run out of Mithril Hall in pursuit of her
foolish drow friend, she had honestly overcome her grief for Wulfgar. The
grieving process had come full circle for Catti-brie, and her actions were
motivated only by loyalty. She had everything to lose, yet had gone alone
into the savage Underdark for the sake of a friend.
	I came to understand this when first I looked into her eyes in the
dungeons of House Baenre. I came to understand fully the meaning of the
word courage.
	And I came, for the first time since Wulfgar fell, to know inspiration. I
had fought as the hunter, savagely, mercilessly, but it wasn’t until I looked
again upon my loyal friend that I regained the eyes of the warrior. Gone
was my resignation and acceptance of fate; gone was my belief that all
would be right ~f House Baenre got its sacrifice, gave my heart to Lloth.
	In that dungeon, the healing potions returned strength to my battered
limbs; the sight of grim, determined Catti-brie returned strength to my
heart. I vowed then that I would resist, that I would fight the overwhelm 
ing events, and would fight to win.
	When I saw Catti-brie, I remembered all that I had to lose.

, Drizzt Do’Urden
Chapter 23

DUK TAK

	She reached for an arrow, then shifted her bow out in
front of her in defense as a glob of greenish goo erupted
from the wand and flew at her.
	Catti-brie’s bow was suddenly tight against her
chest, and she was flying, to smack hard against the wall. One arm
was pinned tightly against her chest, the other tightly to her hip, 
and she could not move her legs. She could not even fall from the
wall!
	She tried to call out, but her jaw would not work, and one eye
would not open. She could see, barely, with the other eye, and she
somehow managed to continue to draw breath.
	Entreri spun about, sword and dagger coming to the ready. He
dove to the side, to the middle of the room, in front of Catti-brie, 
when he saw the three drow females enter, two of them aiming
loaded hand crossbows his way.
	The agile assassin rolled back to his feet and started forward, 
rising up as if he would leap into his attackers. Then he dove low, 
sword leading.
	The skilled drow females held their shots through the assassin’s
feint, then brought their hands in line. The first dart hit Entreri’s
shoulder and jolted him more than he would have expected. Sud 
denly, his momentum was stolen and he was standing straighter.
Black arcs of electricity, writhing like sparking tentacles, shot out
from the dart, burning him, jolting him back a few steps.
	The second dart got him in the belly and, though the initial hit
did not pain the assassin too greatly, a huge electrical blast followed, 
hurling him backward to the floor. His sword went flying, narrowly
missing the trapped Catti-brie.
	Entreri came to a stop at the young woman’s feet. He still
clutched his jeweled dagger, and thought immediately that he
might have to throw the thing. But he could only watch in astonish 
ment as the fingers of that hand twitched involuntarily, his grasp on
the dagger weakening. He willed his arm to heave the blade, but his
muscles would not respond, and the dagger soon toppled out of his
trembling hand.
	He lay on the stone at Catti-brie’s feet, confused and scared. For
the first time in his life, those finely honed warrior muscles would
not answer his call.
	It was the third female, in the middle of the trio, that held
Drizzt’s attention: Vendes Baenre, Duk Tak, his merciless torturer
for all these long days. Drizzt stood very still, holding the coat of
chain mail in front of him, not even daring to blink. The females
flanking the cruel Baenre daughter put away their hand crossbows
and drew two shining swords each.
	Drizzt expected to be blown away, or held by some magical
intrusion, as Vendes quickly chanted under her breath.
	“Valiant friends, ” the wicked noble remarked sarcastically, 
using perfect surface Common.
	Drizzt understood the nature of her spell then, a dweomer that
allowed her to communicate with Entreri and Catti-brie.
	Entreri’s mouth moved weirdly, and the expression on his face
revealed what he was trying to say more than any decipherable
words. “High ritual?”
	“Indeed, ” Vendes replied. “My mother and sisters, and many
visiting matron mothers, are gathered in the chapel. I was excused
from the initial ceremonies and was instructed to bring Drizzt
Do’Urden in to them later.” She eyed Drizzt and seemed perfectly
content. “I see that your friends have saved me the trouble of for 
cing the healing potions down your throat.
	“Did you really expect to so easily walk into House Baenre, steal
our most valuable prisoner, and walk out?” Vendes asked Entreri.
“You were seen before you ever crossed the web fence, and there
will be inquiries as to how you got your unclean hands on my
brother’s mask! Gromph, or perhaps that dangerous Jarlaxle, will
have many questions to answer.
	“I am surprised at you, too, assassin, ” she went on. “Your repu 
tation precedes you, I would have expected a better performance.
Did you not understand the significance of mere males guarding
our prized catch?”
	She looked to Drizzt and shook her head. “Those pretend
guards I put in place were expendable, of course, ” she said. Drizzt
made no move, showed no reply in his features. He felt the strength
returning to him as the healing potions did their work, but that
strength would make little difference, he realized, facing the likes of
Vendes and two supremely armed and trained females. The ranger
looked to his coat of armor disdainfully, it would do him little
good held in his hands.
	Entreri’s mind was working more clearly now, but his body was
not. The electrical impulses continued, defeating any coordinated
attempt at movement. He did manage to drop one hand into his
pouch, though, in response to something Vendes had said, some
hint at fleeting hope.
	“We suspected that the human woman was alive, ” Vendes
explained, “in the clutches of Jarlaxle, most likely, and we hardly
hoped that she would be so easily delivered to us.
	Entreri had to wonder if Jarlaxle had double crossed him. Had
the mercenary concocted this elaborate plan for no better reason
than to deliver Catti-brie to House Baenre? It made no sense to
Entreri, but little about Jarlaxle’s actions these last hours made
sense to him.
	The mention of Catti-brie brought a measure of fire to Drizzt’s
eyes. He couldn’t believe that the young woman was here, in Men 
zoberranzan, that she had risked so much to come after him. Where
was Guenhwyvar? he wondered. And had Bruenor or Regis come
along beside Catti-brie?
	He winced as he eyed the young woman, wrapped in greenish
goo. How vulnerable she seemed, how utterly helpless.
	The fires burned brighter in Drizzt’s lavender eyes when he
returned his gaze to Vendes. Gone was his fear of his torturer; gone
was his resignation about how things had to end.
	In one swift motion, Drizzt dropped the suit of armor and
snapped out his scimitars.
	On a nod from Vendes, the two females were on Drizzt, one cir 
cling to each side. One tapped her sword against Twinkle’s curving
blade, indicating that Drizzt should drop the weapon. He looked
down to Twinkle, and all logic told him to comply.
	He spun the scimitar in a wild arc instead, swishing the female’s
sword aside. His second blade came up suddenly, defeating a thrust
from the other side before it ever began.
	“0 fool!” Vendes cried at him in obvious glee. “I do so wish to
see you fight, Drizzt Do’Urden, since Dantrag is so intent on
slaughtering you!”
	The way she said it made Drizzt wonder who Vendes would
want to win that potential fight. He had no time to ponder the con 
tinuing intrigue of the chaotic world, though, not with two drow
females pressing him so.
	Vendes reverted to the Drow language then, commanding her
soldiers to beat Drizzt fiercely, but not to kill him.
	Drizzt turned a sudden spin, like a screw, his blades weaving a
dangerous pattern on all sides. He came out of it suddenly, viciously, 
snapping a thrust at the female on his left. He scored a minor hit, 
doing no real damage against the fabulous drow armor, armor that
Drizzt was not wearing.
	That point was driven home by the tip of a sword that then
nicked Drizzt from the right. He grimaced and pivoted back, his
backhanded cut taking the sword away before it could do any real
damage.



	Entreri prayed that Vendes was as intent on the fight as her sol 
diers, for every movement he made seemed so very clumsy and
obvious. Somehow, he managed to get the spider mask out of his
pouch and over his trembling hand, and then he reached up and
grabbed Catti-brie’s belt.
	His trembling fingers could not support the hold, though, and
he fell back to the floor.
	Vendes glanced casually his way, snickered, apparently not
noticing the mask, and turned back to the fight.
	Entreri sat half propped by the wall, trying to find some inner
control to ward off the nasty drow enchantment, but all his efforts
proved useless; his muscles continued their involuntary twitching.



	Swords cut in at Drizzt from every angle. One drew a line on his
cheek, stinging him painfully. The skilled females, working per 
fectly in concert, kept him pinned near the corner, gave him no
room to maneuver. Still, Drizzt’s parrying work was excellent, and
Vendes applauded his outstanding, if futile, efforts.
	Drizzt knew that he was in serious trouble. Unarmored and still
weak (though the magical potions continued to flow through his
veins), he had few tricks that could get him past so powerful a tan 
dem.
	A sword cut low; Drizzt hopped the blade. Another chopped
down, from the other side, but Drizzt, crouching as he leaped, got
Twinkle up to deflect it. His other scimitar snapped back and forth
in front of him, defeating the two middle height attacks, one from
each female, and completing the four parry.
	But Drizzt could not counter with any offensive routines as the
relentless barrage continued, forcing him back on his heels, forcing
him to react in awkward angles.
	He hopped and ducked, spun his blades this way and that, and
somehow managed to keep those stinging swords from cutting any
deep holes in his vulnerable body, though the minor hits were
beginning to add up.
	The ranger glanced forlornly at Catti-brie, terrified at the
prospects of what she would soon face.



	Entreri continued to wage his futile war, then finally slumped
low, defeated, thinking that he could not possibly fight his way past
the powerful enchantment.
	But the assassin had not survived the streets of dangerous
Calimport, had not risen to a position of leadership in the evil
underworld of the southern city, by accepting defeat. He changed
his thinking, decided that he had to work within the parameters
offered to him.
	Entreri’s arm shot up above him. His fingers did not grasp, he
did not try to grasp, but rather, he slapped his arm hard against the
binding goo.
	That was all the grip he would need.
	With tremendous effort, Entreri coiled his stuck arm and pulled
himself halfway up beside the trapped woman.
	Catti-brie was watching him, helpless and hopeless, having no
idea what he meant to do. She even winced and tried to duck
(though of course her head would not move an inch) as the assas 
sin’s free arm swung about, as though she feared that he meant to
strike her.
	It was not the jeweled dagger perched in that free hand, though, 
but the spider mask, and Catti-brie began to understand as it came
over the very top of her head. It wouldn’t slip down very far at first, 
blocked by the binding goo, but that greenish sludge instantly
began to give way to the item’s mighty magic.
	Catti-brie was fully blinded as a wave of goo, then the bottom
lip of the spider mask, covered her one free eye.
	A moment later, her other eye blinked open.
	Sparks flew as the battle intensified, the females pressing more
fiercely against the stubborn defenses of the renegade male.
	“Be done with it!” impatient Vendes growled. “Take him down, 
that we might drag him to the chapel, that he might bear witness as
we sacrifice the foolish woman to Lloth!”
	Of all the things that Vendes could have said, of all the threats
that she could have then laid upon Drizzt Do’Urden, none would
have been so foolish. The notion of Catti-brie, dear and innocent
Catti-brie, being given to the horrid, wretched Spider Queen was
too much for Drizzt’s sensibilities to bear.
	No longer was he Drizzt Do’Urden, for his rational identity was
replaced by the welling urges of the primal hunter, the savage.
	The female on his left came with another measured counter, but
the one on his right struck more daringly, one of her swords thrust 
ing far beyond the tip of Drizzt’s blocking scimitar.
	It was a cunning move, but in the heightened sensibilities of the
hunter, that thrusting sword seemed to move almost in slow
motion. Drizzt let the tip get within a few inches of his vulnerable
abdomen before the blade in his left hand slashed across, deflecting
the sword out wide, crossing under his upraised arm as his other
scimitar worked against the female’s second sword.
	His scimitars then crossed in a powerful diagonal parry, alter 
nating their targets, his left arm shooting across and up, his right
across and down.
	He dove to his knees, straight ahead, using his closest enemy’s
body to prevent the other female from hitting him. In came his right
hand, deftly turning the blade so that it slashed against the outside
of his opponent’s knee, buckling the leg. Drizzt punched out with
his left, connecting on the female’s belly and throwing her back over
that collapsing leg.
	Still on his knees, the ranger spun desperately, hacking across
with his left as the other female rushed in on him.
	She was too high. The scimitar took one sword out wide, but the
other sword poked lower.
	The hunter’s second scimitar intercepted it and turned it aside, 
though it slashed Drizzt’s skin and nicked a rib.
	Back and forth went the parries and thrusts, the hunter feeling
no pain from this newest and most serious wound. It seemed
impossible to Vendes, but Drizzt managed to get a foot under him
and was soon standing even with her skilled soldier.
	The other female writhed on the ground, clutching her blasted
leg and tucking her arm tightly over her slashed belly.
	“Enough!” Vendes cried, holding her wand Drizzt’s way. She
had enjoyed the spectacular battle, but had no intention of losing
any females.
	“Guenhwyvar!” came a shrill cry.
	Vendes looked to the side, to the human woman, wearing the
spider mask!, crouching low, away from the binding goo. Catti-brie
charged out from the wall, dropping the magical figurine and
scooping up a certain dagger as she went.
	Instinctively, Vendes loosed another gob of goo, but it seemed to
pass right through the charging woman to splat harmlessly against
the wall.
	Somewhat disoriented and certainly off balance, Catti-brie
simply dove forward, dagger out. She managed to nick Vendes’
hand, but the parrying wand rushed across and turned the deadly
blade before it could dig in.
	Catti-brie crashed heavily into the drow’s thighs, and both
females went sprawling, the woman trying to hold on, and Vendes
kicking and scrambling fiercely to get away.



	Drizzt’s scimitars banged against the remaining female’s
swords so rapidly that it sounded like one long, scraping ring. She
kept up with his fury for a few moments, to her credit, but gradually
her parries came later and later against the barrage of thrusts and
cuts.
	A sword snapped up to her right, defeating Twinkle. Her sec 
ond sword turned up and out to take the second thrusting scimitar
to the side.
	But the second scimitar was not really thrusting, and it was the
female’s sword that went out. She recognized the feint and halted
her own weapon’s progress, bringing it right back in.
	She was too late. Drizzt’s scimitar plunged through the fine
mesh armor. He was open to any counter, but the female had no
strength, no life, left as the wicked scimitar jabbed at her heart. She
shuddered as Drizzt withdrew the blade.



	A flurry of punches battered Catti-brie’s head as she hugged
tightly to the vicious drow’s legs. The spider mask had turned
about, and Catti-brie could not see, but she realized that if Vendes
had a weapon handy, she would be in trouble.
	Blindly, Catti-brie reached up with one hand, trying to grab at a
drow wrist. Vendes was too quick for the move, though, and not
only got her arm out of the way, but wriggled one leg free as well.
She coiled and kicked, and Catti-brie nearly swooned.
	Vendes pushed powerfully against her, slipping free, then Catti 
brie was scrambling, trying to catch up to the suddenly receding
legs. The young woman hesitated for just an instant, to pull the
troublesome mask from her face, then cried out in denial as she saw
Vendes’s feet slipping too far from her grasp. The Baenre daughter
quickly regained her footing and ran from the room.
	Catti-brie could easily fathom the consequences of letting this
one get away. Stubbornly, she put her arms under her and started to
rise, but was pushed back to the floor by a gentle hand as someone
came over her. She saw the bare feet of Drizzt Do’Urden hit the
stone floor in front of her, in full pursuit.
	Drizzt twisted weirdly as he came into the corridor. He threw
himself backward and to the floor so fiercely that Catti-brie feared
he had been clotheslined. She understood the move as Drizzt’s own
doing, though, as a gob of greenish goo flew harmlessly above him.
	A twisting roll realigned Drizzt and put his feet back under him, 
and he shot off like a springing cat.
	And a springing cat, Guenhwyvar, followed, leaping over Catti 
brie and into the corridor, turning so perfect an angle, the instant the
paws touched the stone, that Catti-brie had to blink to make sure
she was not seeing things.
	“Na u!” came the doomed drow’s cry of protest from out in the
corridor. The warrior whom Vendes had tortured, had beaten with 
out mercy, was upon her, his eyes raging with fires of vengeance.
	Guenhwyvar came right behind, desperate to help Drizzt, but in
the instant it took the cat to reach the fighting, a scimitar had
already plunged deep into Vendes’s stomach.



	A groan from the side refocused Catti-brie’s attention. She spot 
ted the wounded female crawling for her dropped weapons.
	Catti-brie scrambled immediately, staying on the floor, and
wrapped her legs about the drow’s neck, squeezing with all her
strength. Both ebon skinned hands came up to tear at her, to punch
at her. But then the female calmed, and Catti-brie thought she had
surrendered, until she noticed the drow’s lips moving.
	She was casting a spell!
	Purely on instinct, Catti-brie poked her finger repeatedly into
the drow’s eyes. The chant became cries of pain and protest, and
they became no more than a wheeze as Catti-brie clamped her legs
down tighter.
	Catti-brie hated this with all her generous heart. The killing
revolted her, especially a fight such as this, where she would have to
watch for agonizing seconds, minutes perhaps, while she suffocated
her opponent.
	She spied Entreri’s dagger not far away and grabbed it. Tears of
rage and innocence lost filled her blue eyes as she brought the
deadly blade to bear.



	Guenhwyvar skidded to a stop, and Drizzt roughly retracted
the embedded blade and took a step back.
	“Nau?” stunned Vendes repeated, the drow word for “no.~~
Vicious Duk Tak seemed little to Drizzt then, almost pitiful. She was
doubled over in pain, trembling violently.
	She fell over at Drizzt’s feet. Her mouth moved, forming the
denying word one last time, but no sound came from her breathless
lips and the red glow left her eyes forever.


Chapter 24
HEAD FIRST
	
	Drizzt came back into his cell to see Catti-brie still lying
on the stone floor, holding the spider mask and gasping
heavily as she tried to steady her breathing. Behind her, 
ntreri hung awkwardly by one arm, twisted and stuck
to the gooey wall.
	“This’ll get him down, ” Catti-brie explained, tossing the mask
to Drizzt.
	Drizzt caught the mask but made no move, having much more
on his mind than freeing the assassin.
	“Regis telled me, ” Catti-brie explained, though that point
seemed obvious enough. “I made him tell me.”
	“You came alone?”
	Catti-brie shook her head, and for a moment Drizzt nearly
swooned, thinking that another of his friends might be in peril, or
might be dead. But Catti-brie motioned to Guenhwyvar, and the
ranger breathed a sigh of relief.
	“You are a fool, ” Drizzt replied, his words wrought of sheer
incredulity and frustration. He scowled fiercely at Catti-brie, want 
ing her to know that he was not pleased.
	“No more than yerself, ” the young woman answered with a
wistful smile, a smile that stole the scowl from Drizzt’s face. The
dark elf couldn’t deny his joy at seeing Catti-brie again, even in this
dangerous circumstance.
	“Are ye wanting to talk about it now?” Catti-brie asked, smiling
still. “Or are ye wanting to wait until we’re back in Mithril Hall?”
	Drizzt had no answer, just shook his head and ran a hand
through his thick mane. He looked to the spider mask then, and to
Entreri, and his scowl returned.
	“We’ve a deal, ” Catti-brie quickly put in. “He got me to ye, and
said he’d get us both out, and we’re to guide him back to the sur 
face.”
	“And once there?” Drizzt had to ask.
	“Let him go his way, and we’re to go our own, ” Catti-brie
answered firmly, as though she needed to hear the strength of her
voice for the sake of her own resolve.
	Again Drizzt looked doubtfully from the mask to the assassin.
The prospects of setting Artemis Entreri free on the surface did not
sit well in the noble ranger’s gut. How many would suffer for
Drizzt’s actions now? How many would again be terrorized by the
darkness that was Artemis Entreri?
	“I gived me word, ” Catti-brie offered in the face of her friend’s
obvious doubts.
	Drizzt continued to ponder the consequences. He couldn’t deny
Entreri’s potential value on the ensuing journey, particularly the
fight they would likely face in getting out of the Baenre complex.
Drizzt had fought beside the assassin before on similar occasions, 
and together they had been nothing short of brilliant.
	Still...
	“I came in good faith, ” Entreri stuttered through chattering, 
barely controlled teeth. “I saved... I. . . saved that one.” His free
arm twitched out as though to indicate Catti-brie, but it jerked sud 
denly, violently, and banged against the wall instead.
	“I’ll have your word then, ” Drizzt offered, moving toward the
man. He meant to go on and exact a promise from Entreri that his
evil deeds would be at an end, even that once on the surface he
would willingly stand trial for his dark past. Entreri saw it coming
clearly, though, and cut Drizzt short, his rising anger giving him
temporary control over his uncooperative muscles.
	“Nothing!” he snarled. “You have what I offered to her!”
	Drizzt immediately looked back to Catti-brie, who was up and
moving for her bow.
	“I gived me word, ” she replied, more emphatically, matching
his doubtful stare.
	“And we are running.., short.., of time, ” Entreri added.
	The ranger moved the last two steps swiftly and plopped the
mask over Entreri’s head. The man’s arm slid out of the goo and he
dropped to the floor, unable to gain enough control to even stand.
Drizzt went for the remaining potion bottles, hoping that they
might restore the assassin’s muscle control. He still wasn’t wholly.
convinced that showing Entreri back to the surface was the right
choice, but he decided that he couldn’t wait around and debate the
issue. He would free Entreri, and together the three and Guenhwy 
var would try to escape the compound and the city. Other problems
would have to be dealt with later.
	It would all be moot, after all, if the potion’s healing magic did
not help the assassin, for Drizzt and Catti-brie surely could not
carry the man out of there.
	But Entreri was standing again before he had even finished his
first draw on the ceramic flask. The effects of the dart were tempo 
rary and fast fading, and the revitalizing potion spurred the recov 
ery even more quickly.
	Drizzt and Catti-brie shared another flask, and Drizzt, after
strapping on his armor, belted on two of the six remaining and gave
two each to his companions.
	“We have to go back out of Baenre’s great mound, ” Entreri said, 
readying himself for the journey. “The high ritual is still in progress, 
no doubt, but if the slain minotaurs on the higher level have been
discovered, then we’ll likely find a host of soldiers waiting for us.”
	“Unless Vendes, in her arrogance, came down here alone, ”
Drizzt replied. His tone, and the assassin’s responding stare
revealed that neither of them thought that possibility likely
	“Head first, ” Catti-brie offered. Both her companions looked to
her, not understanding.
	“The dwarven way, ” the young woman explained. “When ye’ve
a back to yer wall, ye put yer head down low and let it lead.”
	Drizzt looked to Guenhwyvar, to Catti-brie and her bow, to
Entreri and his deadly blades, and to his own scimitars, how con 
venient for cocky Dantrag, in anticipation of his fight with the cap 
tured ranger, to have placed all of Drizzt’s items so near at hand!
“They may have us cornered, ” Drizzt admitted, “but I doubt that
they understand what it is they have cornered!”



	Matron Baenre, Matron Mez’Barris Armgo, and K’yorl Odran
stood in a tight triangle atop the central altar of House Baenre’s
immense chapel. Five other matron mothers, rulers of the fourth  to
eighth ranking houses of the city, formed a ring about the trio. This
elite group, Menzoberranzan’s ruling council, met often in the
small, secret room used as council chambers, but not in centuries
had they come together in prayer.
	Matron Baenre felt truly at the pinnacle of her power. She had
brought them together, one and all, had banded the eight ruling
houses in an alliance that would force all of Menzoberranzan to fol 
low Matron Baenre’s lead to Mithril Hall. Even vicious K’yorl, so
resistant to the expedition and the alliance, now seemed honestly
caught up in the budding frenzy Earlier in the ceremony, K’yorl, 
with no prompting, had offered to go along personally on the
attack, and Mez’Barris Armgo, not wanting the ruler of the house
ranked behind her own to shine darker in Matron Baenre’s eyes, 
had immediately offered likewise.
	Lloth was with her, Matron Baenre believed with all of her evil
heart. The others believed that Lloth was with the withered matron
mother, too, and, thus, the alliance had been firmly joined.
	Matron Baenre did well to hide her smile through the next por 
tions of the ceremony She tried hard to be patient with Vendes. She
had sent her daughter to get Drizzt, after all, and Vendes was expe 
rienced enough in the ways of drow rituals to understand that the
renegade might not survive the ceremony If Vendes took a few tor 
turing liberties with the prisoner now, Matron Baenre could not
fault her. Baenre did not plan to sacrifice Drizzt at the ceremony She
had many games left to play with that one, and dearly wanted to
give Dantrag his chance to outshine all other weapon masters in
Menzoberranzan. But these religious frenzies had a way of deciding
their own events, Baenre knew, and if the situation demanded that
Drizzt be given over to Lloth, then she would eagerly wield the sac 
rificial dagger.
	The thought was not an unpleasant one.



	At the front of the circular structure, beside the great doors, 
Dantrag and Berg’inyon found themselves faced with equally diffi 
cult choices. A guard sneaked in, whispering word that some com 
motion had occurred at the great mound, that several minotaurs
were rumored killed, and that Vendes and her escort had gone to
the lower levels.
	Dantrag looked down the rows of seated dark elves, to the
raised central dais. All of his other sisters were down there, and his
elder brother, Gromph, as well (though he didn’t doubt that
Gromph would have eagerly accepted the excuse to be out of that
female dominated scene). The high ritual was a ceremony of emo 
tional peaks and valleys, and the ruling matron mothers, turning
faster and faster circles on the dais, slapping their hands together
and chanting wildly, were surely heading for a peak.
	Dantrag looked into the waiting gaze of Berg’inyon, the
younger Baenre obviously at a loss as to how they should proceed.
	The weapon master moved out of the main hall, taking the
guard and Berg’inyon with him. Behind them there came a succes 
sion of crescendos as the frenzied cheers mounted.
	Go to the perimeter, Dantrag’s hands flashed to Berg’inyon, for he
would have had to shout to be heard. See that it is secure.
	Berg’inyon nodded and moved off down the bending corridor, 
to one of the secret side doors, where he had left his lizard mount.
	Dantrag took a quick moment to check his own gear. Likely, 
Vendes had the situation, if there even was a situation, well under
control, but deep inside, Dantrag almost hoped that she did not, 
hoped that his fight with Drizzt would be thrust upon him. He felt
his sentient sword’s agreement with that thought, felt a wave of
vicious hunger emanate from the weapon.
	Dantrag let his thoughts continue down that path. He would
carry the slain renegade’s body in to his mother at the high ritual, 
would let her and the other matron mothers (and Uthegental
Armgo, who sat in the audience) witness the result of his prowess.
	The thought was not an unpleasant one.



	“Head first, ” Catti-brie mouthed silently as the companions
came up into the main level within the marble cylinder. Guenhwy 
var crouched in front of her, ready to spring; Drizzt and Entreri
stood to either side of the cat, weapons drawn. Catti-brie bent back
Taulmaril.
	A high ranking drow soldier, a female, stood right before the
opening as the marble door slid aside. Wide went her red eyes, and
she threw her hands up before her.
	Catti-brie’s arrow blew right through the meager defense, blew
right through the female, and took down the drow behind her as
well. Guenhwyvar leaped in the arrow’s wake, easily clearing the
two falling dark elves and barreling into a host of others, scattering
them all across the circular room.
	Out went Drizzt and Entreri, one on either side of the opening, 
their flashing weapons leading. They came back into Catti-brie’s
line of sight almost immediately, both of them bearing suddenly
blood stained blades.
	Catti-brie fired again, right between them, pounding a hole in
the fleshy drow wall blocking the entrance to the exit corridor. Then
she leaped out, between her companions, with Drizzt and Entreri
doing equally brilliant sword work on either side of her. She fired
again, nailing a drow to one of the side doors in the circular room.
Entreri’s dagger bit hard into a drow heart; Drizzt’s scimitars
crossed up an opponent’s attack routine, then countered, one over
the other in opposing, diagonal, downward swipes, drawing a neat
X on the drow’s throat.
	But this was Guenhwyvar ‘s show. Inside the crowded room, 
nothing in all the world could have created more general havoc and
panic than six hundred pounds of snarling, clawing fury Guenhwy 
var dashed this way and that, swiping one drow on the backside, 
tripping up another with a bite to the ankle. The cat actually killed
no dark elves in that wild rush through the room and into the corri 
dor, but left many wounded, and many more fleeing, terrified, in its
wake.
	Catti-brie was first into the corridor.
	“Shoot the damned door!” Entreri cried to her, but she needed
no prodding and put the first and second arrows away before the
assassin even finished the command. Soon she could hardly even
see the door for the blazing shower of sparks igniting all about it, 
but what she could make out continued to appear solid.
	“Open, oh, open!” the young woman shouted, thinking that
they were going to be trapped in the corridor. Once the chaos in the
room behind them subsided, their enemies would overwhelm them.
Just to accentuate Catti-brie’s fears, the corridor suddenly went
black.
	Good fortune alone saved them, for the woman’s next shot
struck one of the opening mechanisms within the door, and up it
slid. Still running blindly, Catti-brie stumbled out into the Baenre
compound, Drizzt and Entreri, and then Guenhwyvar, coming fast
behind.
	They saw the streaks of glowing house emblems, leaving a
residual trail of light as several lizard riders swarmed to the area of
the commotion. The companions had to make their choice immedi 
ately, as crossbow quarrels clicked off the stone around them.
Entreri took up the lead. His first thought was to go for the fence, 
but he realized that the three of them, with only one spider mask, 
could not get past that barrier in time. He ran to the right, around
the side of the great mound. It was an uneven wall, for the structure
was really a tight cluster of several huge stalagmites. Catti-brie and
Drizzt came right behind, but Guenhwyvar pivoted completely
about just outside the doorway, and rushed back in, scattering the
closest pursuing dark elves.
	Entreri’s mind worked furiously, trying to remember the gen 
eral layout of the huge compound, trying to discern how many
guards were likely on duty, and where they were all normally
located. The immense house grounds covered nearly half a mile in
one direction and a quarter of a mile in the other, and many of the
guards, if Entreri chose correctly, would never get near the fighting.
	It seemed as if all the drow of the house were about them now, 
though, a mounting frenzy on all sides of the escaping prisoners.
	“There’s nowhere to go!” Catti-brie cried. A javelin slammed
the stone just above her head, and she swung about, Taulmaril
ready The enemy dark elf was already moving, diving out of sight
behind a mound near the fence, but Catti-brie let fly anyway. The
magical arrow skipped off the stone and slammed the fence, disinte 
grating into a tremendous shower of silver and purple sparks. For a
moment, the woman dared to hope that luck had shown her a way
to blow through the barrier, but when the sparks cleared, she real 
ized that the strand of the mighty fence wasn’t even scratched.
	Catti-brie hesitated for a moment to consider the shot, but
Drizzt slammed roughly against her back, forcing her to run on.
	Around another bend went the assassin, only to find that many
drow were coming at them from the other direction. With enemies
so close, to run out into the open compound would have been sui 
cide, and they could go neither forward nor back the way they had
come. Entreri rushed forward anyway, then cut a sharp right, leap 
ing up onto the mound, onto a narrow, ascending walkway used
mostly by the goblin slaves the Baenre family had put to work
sculpting the outside of the gorgeous palace.
	The ledge was not difficult for the assassin, who was used to
running along the high, narrow gutters of the great houses of south 
ern cities. Neither was it difficult for Drizzt, so agile and balanced. If
Catti-brie had found the time to pause a moment and consider her
course, though, she likely would not have been able to go on. They
were running up a path a foot and a half wide, open on one side (to
an increasingly deep drop) and with an uneven wall on the other.
But the dark elves were not far behind, and none of the fugitives
had time to consider his or her course. Catti-brie not only paced
Entreri step for step, but she managed to fire off a couple of shots
into the compound below, just to keep her enemies scrambling for
cover.
	Entreri thought that they had met an obstacle when he rounded
a bend to find two stupidly staring goblin workers. The terrified
slaves wanted no part of any fight, though, and they dove over the
edge of the walkway, sliding the bumpy ride down the side of the
mound.
	Around the next bend the assassin spotted a wide and deco 
rated balcony, five feet to the side of the continuing walkway.
Entreri leaped onto it, seeing a better carved stairway ascending
from that point.
	As soon as he landed, two dark elves burst out of doors set in
the back of the balcony, against the mound. A silver streaking arrow
greeted the first, blowing her back into the carved room, and Entreri
made short work of the other, finishing her before Drizzt and Catti 
brie had even leaped across to join him.
	Then came Guenhwyvar, the panther flying past the three sur 
prised companions to take up the lead along the stairway
	Higher and higher went the companions, fifty feet, a hundred
feet, two hundred feet, off the ground. Huffing and puffing, the
tired group ran on, having no choice. Finally, after they had put a
thousand feet below them, the huge stalagmite became a stalactite, 
and the stair gave way to horizontal walkways, connecting many of
the larger hanging stones over the Baenre compound.
	A group of drow charged along the walkway from the other
direction, cutting off the companions. The dark elves fired their
hand crossbows as they came, into the great panther as Guenhwy 
var flattened its ears and charged. Darts stung the cat, pumping
their poison, but Guenhwyvar would not be stopped. Realizing this, 
the trailing members of the group turned and fled, and some of
those caught too close to the cat simply leaped over the side of the
railed walkway, using their innate powers of levitation to keep them
aloft.
	Catti-brie immediately hit one of them with an arrow, the force
of the impact spinning the dying drow over and over in midair, to
hang grotesquely at a diagonal, upside down angle, lines of his
blood running freely from the wound to scatter like rain on the
stone floor many hundreds of feet below. The other levitating dark
elves, realizing how vulnerable they were, quickly dropped from
sight.
	Guenhwyvar buried the remaining elves on the walkway.
Entreri came right behind and finished off those wounded drow left
broken in the fierce panther’s wake. Entreri looked back to his com 
panions and gave a determined shout, seeing running room ahead
of them.
	Catti-brie responded in kind, but Drizzt kept silent. He knew
better than the others how much trouble he and his friends were
really in. Many of the Baenre drow could likely levitate, an ability
that Drizzt had for some reason lost after he had spent some time on
the surface. The Baenre soldiers would be up all along the walk 
ways before long, hiding among the stalactites with their hand 
crossbows ready
	The walkway came to another stalactite and split both ways
around the structure. Guenhwyvar went left, Entreri right.
	Suspecting an ambush, the assassin rushed around the bend in a
slide on his knees. A single drow was waiting for him, arm extended.
The dark elf snapped the hand crossbow down as soon as she saw
the assassin coming in low. She fired but missed, and Entreri’s
sword punctured her side. Up came the assassin in a flourish. Hav 
ing no time for any extended battles, Entreri used his prodding
sword as leverage and heaved the female over the railing.
	Drizzt and Catti-brie heard a roar and saw a dark elf, swatted
by the panther, go tumbling away on the left as well. Catti-brie
started that way to follow, but heard a whistle from behind and
looked over her shoulder just as Drizzt’s tattered green cloak waved
in the air. The woman reflexively ducked, then stood.staring at a
crossbow dart that had tangled up in the thick cloth, a crossbow
dart that had been aimed at the back of her head.
	Drizzt dropped the cloak and skipped to Catti-brie’s side, 
affording her a fine view of the walkway behind them and the
group of drow fast approaching.
	On the narrow walkway, there was no better weapon in all the
world than Taulmaril.
	Streak after streak flashed down the length, killing and wound 
ing several drow. Catti-brie thought she could keep up the attack
indefinitely, until all the pursuing enemies were slain, but suddenly
Drizzt grabbed her by the shoulders and heaved her to the side, 
falling flat with her under him halfway around the round stalactite.
	A lightning bolt slammed the stone, right where they had been
standing, showering them both with multicolored sparks.
	“Damn wizard!” the fiery woman shouted. She came up on one
knee and fired again, thinking she had located the mage. Her arrow
dove for the approaching group, but hit some magical barrier and
exploded into nothingness.
	“Damn wizard!” Catti-brie cried again, then she was running, 
pulled on by Drizzt.
	The walkway beyond the stalactite was clear, and the compan 
ions far outdistanced those pursuing, as the dark elves had to be
wary of any ambush near the pillar.
	Many intersecting walkways, a virtual maze above the great
compound, presented themselves, and very few Baenre soldiers
were anywhere to be seen. Again it seemed as though the friends
had some running room, but where could they go? The entire cav 
ern of Menzoberranzan was opened wide before them, below them, 
but the walkways ended far short of the perimeter of the Baenre
compound in every direction, and few stalactites hung low enough
to join with the great stalagmite mounds that might have offered
them a way to get back to the ground.
	Guenhwyvar, apparently sharing those confused thoughts, fell
back into the group, and Entreri again took up the lead. He soon
came to a fork in the walkway and looked back to Drizzt for guid 
ance, but the drow only shrugged. Both of the seasoned warriors
realized that the defenses were fast organizing around them.
	They came to another stalactite pillar and followed a ringing
walkway ascending its curving side. They found a door, for this one
pillar was hollowed, but there was only a single, empty room
inside, no place to hide. At the top of the ascending ring, the bridg 
ing walkways continued on in two directions. Entreri started left, 
then stopped abruptly and fell flat to his back.
	A javelin soared just over him, hitting and sinking into the stone
stalactite right in front of Catti-brie’s face. The young woman stared
at it as writhing black tentacles arched along its quivering length, 
crackling and biting at the rock. Catti-brie could only imagine what
pains that evil looking enchantment might cause.
	“Lizard riders, ” Drizzt whispered into her ear, pulling her
along once more. Catti-brie looked all about for a shot and heard the
scuttling feet of subterranean lizards as they ran along the cavern’s
ceiling. But in the dimly lit view afforded her by her magical circlet, 
she made out no clear targets.
	“Drizzt Do’Urden!” came a cry from a lower, parallel walkway
Drizzt stopped and looked that way, to see Berg’inyon Baenre on his
lizard, hanging under the closest edge of the stone walkway and
readying a javelin. The young Baenre’s throw was remarkable, 
given the distance and his curious angle, but still the weapon fell
short.
	Catti-brie responded with a shot as the rider darted back under
the stone bridge, her arrow skimming the stone and flying freely to
the ground so very far below.
	“That was a Baenre, ” Drizzt explained to her, “a dangerous one
indeed!”
	“Was, ” Catti-brie replied evenly, and she took up her bow and
fired again, this time aiming for the center of the lower bridge. The
magical arrow burrowed through the stone, and there came a
shriek.
	Berg’inyon fell free from below the bridge, and his dead lizard
tumbled after. Out of the companions’ sight, the young noble
enacted his levitational powers and turned about in the air, slowly
descending to the cavern floor.
	Drizzt kissed Catti-brie on the cheek in admiration of the
remarkable shot. Then they ran on, after Entreri and Guenhwyvar.
Around the next stalactite, the two saw Entreri and the cat bury
another dark elf.
	It all seemed so hopeless, though, to no avail. They could keep
scoring minor victories for hours on end and not deplete the
resources of House Baenre. Even worse, sooner or later the com 
pound’s defense would organize fully, and the matron mother and
high priestesses, and probably more than a few powerful wizards as
well, would come out of the domed chapel to join in the chase.
	They climbed a walkway ringing another stalactite, going to the
highest worked levels of the cavern. Still there were drow above
them, they knew, hiding in the shadows, on their lizard mounts, 
carefully picking their shots.
	Guenhwyvar stopped suddenly and sprang straight up, disap 
pearing into a cluster of hanging stones fully twenty five feet above
the walkway. Back down came the mighty panther, raking and
gouging the lizard it brought along. The two crashed to the stone
walkway, rolling and biting, and for a moment, Drizzt thought that
Guenhwyvar would surely go over the side.
	Entreri skidded to a stop a safe distance from the battling beasts, 
but the ranger sprang beyond him, putting his scimitars to deadly
work on the entangled lizard.
	Catti-brie had wisely kept her stare upward, and when a drow
drifted slowly out of the stalactite cluster, Taulmaril was waiting.
The dark elf fired his hand crossbow and missed, the quarrel skip 
ping off the bridge behind her; Catti-brie responded and blew the
tip off a stalactite just to the side of the drow.
	The drow realized immediately that he could not win against
the woman and that deadly bow. He scrambled along the stalactites, 
kicking off them and flying along the cavern’s ceiling. Another
arrow cracked into the stone, not so far behind, and then another
blew out the hanging stone right in front of him, just as he went to
grab at it.
	The levitating drow was stuck with no handholds, hanging in
midair twenty feet up and now a few dozen feet to the side of the
walkway He should have released his levitation spell and dropped
for the ground, recalling the magical energies when he was far
below Catti-brie’s level. He went up instead, seeking the safety of
the nooks in the uneven ceiling.
	Catti-brie took deadly aim and let fly. The streaking arrow
drove right through the doomed drow and thundered up into the
ceiling above, disappearing into the stone. A split second later, there
came another explosion from above, from somewhere above the
cavern roof.
	Catti-brie stared curiously, trying to decipher the meaning of
that second blast.


Chapter 25
THE DESPERATE RUN


	Matron Baenre swelled with pride as the ritual continued, 
undisturbed by the events in the compound. She did
not know that Dantrag and Berg’inyon had gone out
from the chapel, did not know that her vicious Duk Tak
was dead, slain by the very renegade Matron Baenre hoped to soon
present before the other ruling matron mothers.
	All that Matron Baenre knew was the sweet taste of power. She
had brought together the most powerful alliance in recent drow his 
tory, with herself at its head. She had outmaneuvered K’yorl Odran, 
always a clever one, and had virtually cowed Mez’Barris Armgo, 
the second most influential drow in all the city Lloth was smiling
brightly on the matron mother of House Baenre, she believed.
	All she heard was the singing, and not the sounds of battle, and
all she saw, looking up, was the magnificent illusion of the Spider
Queen, going through its perpetual shift from arachnid to drow and
backto arachnid. How could she, or any of the others, watching that
specter with similar awe, know of the raging fight nearly a thou 
sand feet above the roof of that domed chapel, along the bridged
stalactites of House Baenre?



	“A tunnel!” Catti-brie cried to Drizzt. She grabbed him by the
shoulder and turning him toward the still levitating dead drow.
	Drizzt looked at her as though he did not understand.
	“Up above!” she cried. Catti-brie brought her bow up and fired
again into the general area. The arrow slammed into the base of a
stalactite, but did not go through.
	“It’s up there, I tell ye!” the young woman exclaimed. “Another
tunnel, above the cavern!”
	Drizzt looked doubtfully to the area. He did not question Catti 
brie’s claim, but he had no idea of how they might get to this sup 
posed tunnel. The closest walkway was fully a dozen feet from the
area, and to get to that walkway, though it was barely thirty feet
away from and a few feet higher than their current position, the
companions would have to take a roundabout route, many hun 
dreds of yards of running.
	“What is it?” cried Entreri, rushing back to join his hesitating
companions. Looking past them, back down the walkway, the assas 
sin saw the forms of many gathering drow.
	“There may be a tunnel above us, ” Drizzt quickly explained.
	Entreri’s scowl showed that he hardly believed the information
valuable, but his doubts only spurred Catti-brie on. Up came her
bow and off flew the arrows, one after another, all aimed for the
base of that stubborn stalactite.
	A fireball exploded on their walkway, not far behind them, and
the whole bridge shuddered as the metal and stone in the area of the
blast melted and shifted, threatening to break apart.
	Catti-brie spun about and let fly two quick shots, killing one
drow and driving the others back behind the protection of the clos 
est supporting stalactite. From somewhere in the darkness ahead, 
Guenhwyvar growled and crossbows clicked.
	“We must be off!” Entreri prodded them, grabbing Drizzt and
trying to tug him on. The ranger held his ground, though, and
watched with faith as Catti-brie turned again to the side and fired
another of her arrows. It smacked solidly into the weakened stone.
	The targeted stalactite groaned in protest and slipped down on
one side to hang at an awkward angle. A moment later, it fell free
into the far dr”p below. For a moment, Drizzt thought that it might
hit the purple glowing chapel dome, but it smashed to the stone
floor a short distance away, shattering into a thousand pieces.
	Drizzt, his ears keen, widened his eyes as he focused on the
hole, a flicker of hope evident in his expression. “Wind, ” he
explained breathlessly “Wind from the tunnel!”
	It was true. An unmistakable sound of rushing wind emanated
from the hole in the ceiling as the air pressure in the caves above
adjusted to match the air pressure in the great cavern.
	“But how are we to get there?” Catti-brie asked.
	Entreri, convinced now, was already fumbling with his pack. He
took out a length of rope and a grappling hook and soon had the
thing twirling above him. With one shot, he hooked it over the
bridge nearest the tunnel. Entreri rushed to the nearest railing of his
own walkway and tied off the rope, and Drizzt, without the slight 
est hesitation, hopped atop the cord and gingerly began to walk out.
The agile drow picked up speed as he went, gaining confidence.
	That confidence was shattered when an evil dark elf suddenly
appeared. Coming out of an invisibility enchantment, he slashed at
the rope with his fine edged sword.
	Drizzt dropped flat to the rope and held on desperately Two
cuts sliced it free of the grappling hook, and Drizzt swung down
like a pendulum, rocking back and forth ten feet below his compan 
ions on the walkway
	The enemy drow’s smug smile was quickly wiped away by a
silver streaking arrow.
	Drizzt started to climb, then stopped and flinched as a dart
whistled past. Another followed suit, and the drow looked down to
see a handful of soldiers approaching, levitating up and firing as
they came.
	Entreri tugged fiercely at the rope, trying to help the ranger
back to the walkway As soon as Drizzt grabbed the lip, the assassin
pulled him over, then took the rope from him. He looked at it doubt 
fully, wondering how in the Nine Hells he was supposed to hook it
again over the distant walkway without the grappling hook. Entreri
growled determinedly and made the cord into a lasso, then turned
to search for a target.
	Drizzt threw one knee over the bridge and tried to get his feet
under him, just as a thunderous blast struck the walkway right
below them. Both the ranger and Catti-brie were knocked from their
feet. Drizzt fell again, to hang by his fingertips, and the stone under
Catti-brie showed an unmistakable crack.
	A crossbow quarrel hit the stone right in front of the drow’s
face; another popped against the bottom of his boot but did not get
through. Then Drizzt was glowing, outlined by distinctive faerie
fire, making him an even easier target.
	The ranger looked down to the approaching dark elves and
called upon his own innate abilities, casting a globe of darkness in
front of them. Then he pulled himself up over the lip of the bridge, 
to find Catti-brie exchanging volleys with the dark elves behind
them on the walkway, and Entreri pulling in the thrown lasso, curs 
ing all the while.
	“I’ve no way to hook it, ” the assassin growled, and he didn’t
have to spell out the implications. Drow were behind them and
below them, inevitably working their way toward the band. The
walkway, weakened by the magical assaults, seemed not so secure
anymore, and, just to seal their doom, the companions saw Guen 
hwyvar rushing back to them, apparently in full retreat.
	“We’re not to surrender, ” Catti-brie whispered, her eyes filled
with determination. She put another arrow back down the walkway, 
then fell to her belly and hooked her arms over the lip. The ascend 
ing drow wizard was just coming through Drizzt’s darkness globe, 
a wand pointed for the walkway
	Catti-brie’s arrow hit that wand squarely, split it apart, then
gashed the drow’s shoulder as it whistled past him. His scream
was more of terror than of pain as he regarded his shattered wand, 
as he considered the release of magical energy that would follow.
With typical drow loyalty, the wizard threw the wand below him, 
into the darkness and into the midst of his rising comrades. He
urged his levitation on at full speed to get away from the unseen, 
crackling lightning balls, and heard the horrified calls of his dying
companions.
	He should have looked up instead, for he never knew what hit
him as Catti-brie’s next arrow shattered his backbone. That threat
eliminated, or at least slowed, the young woman went back up to
her knees and opened up another barrage on the stubborn dark
elves behind her on the walkway. Their hand crossbows couldn’t
reach Catti-brie, and they couldn’t hope to hurl their javelins that
far, but the woman knew that they were up to something, plotting
some way to cause havoc.
	Guenhwyvar was no ordinary panther; it possessed an intelli 
gence far beyond the norm of its feline kind. Coming fast toward the
cornered companions, Guenhwyvar quickly discerned their
troubles and their hopes. The panther was sorely wounded, carry 
ing a dozen poisoned crossbow darts in its hide as it ran, but its
fierce loyalty was fully with Drizzt.
	Entreri fell back and cried aloud as the cat suddenly rushed up
and bit the rope from his hand. The assassin went immediately for
his weapons, thinking that the cat meant to attack him, but Guen 
hwyvar skidded to a stop, knocking both Entreri and Drizzt sev 
eral feet back, turned a right angle, and leaped away, flying
through the air.
	Guenhwyvar tried to stop, claws raking over the top of the tar 
get walkway’s smooth stone. The cat’s momentum was too great, 
though, and Guenhwyvar, still clamping tightly to the rope, pitched
over the far side, coming to a jerking stop at the rope’s end, some
twenty feet below the bridge.
	More concerned for the cat than for himself, Drizzt instinctively
sprang onto the taut rope and ran across, without regard for the fact
that Guenhwyvar ‘s hold was tentative at best.
	Entreri grabbed Catti-brie and pulled her over, motioning for
her to follow the drow.
	“I cannot walk a tightrope!” the desperate woman explained, 
eyes wide with horror.
	“Then learn!” the assassin roughly replied, and he pushed Catti 
brie so hard that she nearly fell right over the side of the walkway
Catti-brie put one foot up on the rope and started to shift her weight
to it, but she fell back immediately, shaking her head.
	Entreri leaped past her, onto the rope. “Work your bow well!”
he explained. “And be ready to untie this end!”
	Catti-brie did not understand, but had no time to question as
Entreri sped off, walking as surefootedly along the hemp bridge as
had Drizzt. Catti-brie fired down the walkway behind her, then had
to spin about and fire the other way, ahead, at those drow who had
been pursuing Guenhwyvar.
	She had no time to aim either way as she continued to turn back
and forth, and few of her arrows hit any enemies at all.
	Catti-brie took a deep breath. She sincerely lamented the future
she would never know. But she followed the sigh with a resigned
but determined smile. If she was going down, then Catti-brie had
every intention of taking her enemies down with her, had every
intention of offering Drizzt his freedom.



	Some of those inside the great Baenre chapel had heard and felt
the stalactite crash on the compound’s floor, but only slightly, since
the chapel’s walls were of thick stone and two thousand drow
voices within the place were lifted in frantic song to Lloth.
	Matron Baenre was notified of the crash several moments later, 
when Sos’Umptu, her daughter in charge of chapel affairs, found
the opportunity to whisper to her that something might be amiss
out in the compound.
	It pained Matron Baenre to interrupt the ceremony. She looked
around at the faces of the other matron mothers, her only possible
rivals, and remained convinced that they were now wholly commit 
ted to her and her plan. Still, she gave Sos’Umptu permission to
send out, discreetly, a few members of the chapel elite guard.
	Then the first matron mother went back to the ceremony, smil 
ing as though nothing out of the ordinary, except, of course, this
extraordinary gathering, was going on. So secure was Matron
Baenre in the power of her house that her only fears at that time
were that something might disturb the sanctity of the ceremony, 
something might lessen her in the eyes of Lloth.
	She could not imagine the antics of the three fugitives and the
panther far, far above.



	Hanging low over the bridge, coaxing his dear, wounded com 
panion, Drizzt did not hear Entreri touch down on the stone behind
him.
	“There is nothing we can do for the cat!” the assassin said
roughly, and Drizzt spun about, noticing immediately that Catti 
brie was in dire straits across the way
	“You left her!” the ranger cried.
	“She could not cross!” Entreri spat back in his face. “Not yet!”
Drizzt, consumed by rage, went for his blades, but Entreri ignored
him and focused back on Catti-brie, who was kneeling on the stone, 
fumbling with something that the assassin could not discern.
	“Untie the rope!” Entreri called. “But hold fast as you do and
swing out!”
	Drizzt, thinking himself incredibly stupid for not understand 
ing Entreri’s designs, released his grip on his weapon hilts and dove
down to help Entreri brace the hemp. As soon as Catti-brie untied
the other end, six hundred pounds of pressure, from the falling
panther, would yank the rope. Drizzt held no illusions that he and
Entreri could hold the panther aloft for more than a short while, but
they had to make the tug on the other end of the rope less violent, so
that Catti-brie would be able to hold on.
	The young woman made no immediate move for the rope, 
despite Entreri’s screams and the dark elves approaching from both
sides. Finally she went for it, but came up immediately and cried
out, “Suren it’s too tight!”
	“Damn, she has no blade, ” Entreri groaned, realizing his mis 
take.
	Drizzt drew out Twinkle and skipped back atop the rope, deter 
mined to die beside his dear Catti-brie. But the young woman
hooked Taulmaril over her shoulder and leaped out onto the tenta 
tive bridge, wearing an expression of sheer terror. She came across
hanging under the hemp, hands and knees locked tight. Ten feet
out, then fifteen, halfway to her friends.
	The dark elves closed quickly, seeing that no more of those
wicked arrows would be coming at them. The lead drow were
nearly up to the rope, hand crossbows coming up, and Catti-brie
would be an easy target indeed!
	But then the dark elves in front skidded to a sudden stop and
began scrambling to get away, some leaping off the bridge.
	Drizzt did not understand what he was seeing, and had no time
to sort it out as a ball of fire exploded on the other walkway, right
between the converging groups of dark elves. Walls of flame rolled
out at Drizzt, and he fell back, throwing his hands up in front of
him.
	A split second later, Entreri cried out and the rope, burned
through on the other walkway, began to whip past them, with
Guenhwyvar more than balancing Catti-brie’s weight.
	Entreri and Drizzt were quick enough to dive and grab at the
rope when it stopped flying past, when valiant Guenhwyvar, under 
standing that Catti-brie would be knocked from her tentative grasp
as she collided with the side of the walkway, let go and plummeted
into the darkness.
	The bridge across the way creaked apart and fell, crashing
against one levitating drow who had survived the wand explosion, 
and dropping those dark elves remaining on the platform. Most of
those still alive could levitate, and would not fall to their deaths, but
the explosion had certainly bought the companions precious time.
	Catti-brie, her face red from the heat and small flames dancing
along her cloak, kept the presence of mind to reach up and grab
Drizzt’s offered hand.
	“Let Guen go!” she pleaded breathlessly, her lungs pained by
the heat, and Drizzt understood immediately Still holding fast to
the woman’s hand, the ranger fished the figurine out of Catti-brie’s
pouch and called for Guenhwyvar to be gone. He could only hope
that the magic took hold before the panther hit the floor.
	Then the ranger heaved Catti-brie up to the walkway and
wrapped her in a tight hug. Entreri, meanwhile, had retrieved the
grappling hook and was tying it off. A deft shot put the thing through
the hole Catti-brie had created by blasting away the stalactite.
	“Go!” the assassin said to Drizzt, and the drow was off, climb 
ing hand over hand as Entreri anchored the rope around the metal
railing. Catti-brie went next, not nearly as fast as Drizzt, and Entreri
shouted curses at her, thinking that her slowness would allow their
enemies to catch up with them.
	Drizzt could already see dark elves levitating up from the cav 
ern floor beneath his newest position, though it would take them
many minutes to get that high.
	“It is secured!” Drizzt called from the tunnel above, and all
were indeed relieved to learn that there truly was a tunnel up above, 
and not just a small cubby!
	Entreri let go of his hold, then sprang onto the rope as it swung
directly under the hole.
	Drizzt pulled Catti-brie in and considered the climbing man. He
could cut the rope and drop Entreri to his death, and surely the
world would have been a better place without the assassin. But
honor held Drizzt to his word, to Catti-brie’s word. He could not
dispute the assassin’s daring efforts to get them all this far, and he
would not now resort to treachery
	He grabbed Entreri when the man got close and hauled him in.
Holding Taulmaril, Catti-brie went back to the hole, looking for any
dark elves that might be on their way Then she noticed something
else: the purple faerie fire of the great, domed chapel, almost
directly below her position. She thought of the expression on the
faces of those drow at the high ritual inside if Guenhwyvar had
crashed through that roof, and that notion led her mind to other
ideas. She smiled wickedly as she looked again to the dome, and to
the ceiling above it.
	The tunnel was natural and uneven, but wide enough for the
three to walk abreast. A flash stole the darkness up ahead, telling
the companions that they were not alone.
	Drizzt ran ahead, scimitars in hand, thinking to clear the way
Entreri moved to follow, but hesitated, seeing that Catti-brie was
inexplicably going back the other way
	“What are you about?” the assassin demanded, but the woman
didn’t answer. She merely fitted an arrow to her bow as she mea 
sured her steps.
	She fell back and cried out as she crossed a side passage and a
drow soldier leaped out at her, but before he got his sword in line, a
hurled dagger sank into his rib cage. Entreri rushed in, meeting the
next drow in line, calling for Catti-brie to run back the other way, to
join Drizzt.
	“Hold them!” was all the explanation the young woman
offered, and she continued on in the opposite direction.
	“Hold them?” Entreri echoed. He cut down the second drow in
line and engaged the third as two others ran off the way they had
come.



	Drizzt careened around a bend, even leaped onto the curving
wall to keep his desperate speed.
	“Valiant!” came a greeting call, spoken in the Drow tongue, and
the ranger slowed and stopped when he saw Dantrag and Berg’inyon
Baenre sitting casually atop their lizard mounts in the middle of the
passage.
	“Valiant attempt!” Dantrag reiterated, but his smile mocked the
whole escape, made Drizzt feel that all their efforts had done no
more good than offer amusement to the cocky weapon master and
his unbeatable charge.

Chapter 26
CATTI-BRIE ‘S SURPRISE


	I thought that your lizard was shot out from under you, ”
Drizzt remarked, trying to sound confident in the face
	his disappointment.
	Berg’inyon steeled his red glowing gaze upon the
impetuous renegade and did not respond.
	“A fine shot, ” Dantrag agreed, “but it was only a lizard, after all, 
and well worth the entertainment you and your pitiful friends have
provided.” Dantrag casually reached over and took the long death
lance from his brother’s hand. “Are you ready to die, Drizzt
Do’Urden?” he asked as he lowered the deadly tip.
	Drizzt crouched low, feeling his balance, and crossed his scimi 
tars in front of him. Where were Catti-brie and Entreri? he won 
dered, and he feared that they had met resistance, Dantrag’s
soldiers?, back in the corridor.
	Despair washed over him suddenly with the thought that Catti 
brie might already be dead, but the ranger pushed it away, reminded
himself to trust her, to trust that she could take care of herself.
	Dantrag’s lizard leaped ahead, then skittered sideways along a
wall. Drizzt had no idea of which way the creature would veer
when it came near him. Back to the floor? Higher on the wall? Or
might it turn right up onto the ceiling and carry its hanging rider
right above the target?
	Dantrag knew that Drizzt had been on the surface, where there
were no ceilings, for many years, did he think the last choice the
most devious?
	Drizzt started toward the opposite wall, but fell to his knees
instead at the same instant that Dantrag coaxed his fast running, 
sticky footed mount up to the ceiling. The tip of the long lance just
missed the ducking ranger’s head, and Drizzt leaped up as the rider
passed, grabbing at the weapon’s shaft.
	He felt a sting in his lower back, and turned to see Berg’inyon
sitting calmly atop his mount, reloading his hand crossbow.
	“It does not have to be a fair fight, Drizzt Do’Urden!” Dantrag
explained with a laugh. He swung his well trained mount about, 
brought it back to the floor, and lowered the lance once more.



	Sword and dagger flashed wildly as Entreri tried to finish the
stubborn dark elf. This one was a skilled fighter, though, and his
parries were fast and on target. Behind the drow, the other dark
elves were steadily inching toward Entreri, gaining confidence as
they watched their companion hold the assassin’s devilish attacks at
bay
	“What are you doing?” Entreri demanded of Catti-brie, seeing
her kneeling beside a large mound of rock. The woman stood up
and fired an arrow into the stone, then a second, then dropped back
to her knees.
	“What are you doing?” Entreri demanded more emphatically
	“Stop yer whining and be done with the drow, ” Catti-brie
snarled back, and Entreri regarded her incredulously, suddenly not
so sure of what to make of this surprising creature. Almost as an
afterthought, Catti-brie tossed the onyx panther figurine to the floor.
“Come back, Guenhwyvar, ” she said too calmly “Me heroic com 
panion’s needing yer help.”
	Entreri growled and went at his opponent with renewed fury, 
just the effect conniving Catti-brie had hoped for. His sword went
into a circular movement, and his jeweled dagger poked in behind it
at every opportunity
	The dark elf called out something, and one of those nearest him
mustered some courage and came forward to join the combatants.
Entreri growled and reluctantly fell back a step, across the corridor.
	A streaking arrow cut in front of the assassin, stealing his sight, 
and when his vision returned, he faced only one drow again, and
those others watching froin behind, in the side passage, were long
gone.
	Entreri put a sarcastic glance at Catti-brie, but she was firing
into the stone again (and talking to the returned panther) and did
not hear.



	Drizzt felt the burn of drow poison in his back, but felt, too, the
tingling of the recently quaffed healing potions. He started to
swoon, purposely, and heard Dantrag laughing at him, mocking
him. The predictable click of Berg’inyon’s crossbow sounded, and
Drizzt fell right to the stone, the dart arcing over him and stealing
the mirth from the smug weapon master as it skipped off the stone
not so far from Dantrag’s head.
	Dantrag’s charge was on before Drizzt was fully back to his feet, 
the weapon master coming straight at him this time. Drizzt fell to
one knee, shot back up, and spun away, frantically batting at the
dangerous and enchanted lance as it passed just under his high 
flying arm. Dantrag, incredibly fast, snapped off a backhanded slap
into Drizzt’s face as he passed. Drizzt, both his blades intent on
keeping the lance at bay, could not respond.
	Back came the weapon master, impossibly quick, and Drizzt
had to dive to the side as the mighty lance scratched a deep line into
the stone. Drizzt reversed his direction immediately, hoping to score
a hit as the lance went past, but again Dantrag was too quick, snap 
ping out his own sword and not only deflecting Drizzt’s lunge, but
countering with a slapping strike against the side of Drizzt’s out 
stretched hand. And then the sword went back into its sheath, too
fast for Drizzt to follow the move.
	Around wheeled the lizard, going up on a wall for this pass and
sending Drizzt into a frantic roll back the other way
	“How long, Drizzt Do’Urden?” the cocky weapon master asked, 
knowing that Drizzt, with all his frantic dodging had to be tiring.
	Drizzt growled and could not disagree, but as he rose from the
floor, turning to follow the lizard’s progress, the ranger saw a glim 
mer of hope from the corner of his eye: the welcome face of a certain
black panther as it bounded around the corridor’s bend.
	Dantrag was just turning his mount about for a fifth pass when
Guenhwyvar barreled in. Over went the lizard, with Dantrag
strapped in for the ride. The weapon master managed to somehow
get loose of his bindings as the beasts continued to roll, and he came
up, quite shaken, facing the ranger.
	“Now the fight is fair, ” Drizzt declared.
	A crossbow quarrel whistled past Dantrag, and past Drizzt’s
blocking scimitar, to score a hit on the ranger’s shoulder.
	“Hardly, ” Dantrag corrected, his smile returning. Faster than
Drizzt’s eye could follow, he snapped his two swords from their
sheaths and began his measured advance. In his head his sentient
sword, hungering for this fight perhaps more than the weapon
master himself, telepathically agreed.
Hardly.



	“What are you about?” Entreri screamed when Guenhwyvar
bounded past him, giving no apparent regard to his opponent. The
flustered assassin took out his frustration on the lone drow facing
him, hitting the unfortunate soldier with a three cut combination
that left him off balance and with one of his arms severely bleeding.
Entreri probably could have finished the fight right then, except that
his attention was still somewhat focused on Catti-brie.
	“I’m just digging holes, ” the young woman said, as though that
should explain everything. Several more bow shots followed in
rapid succession, chipping away at the hard stone of an enormous
stalactite. One arrow went through then, back into the cavern below.
	“There is fighting ahead, ” Entreri called. “And dark elves will
soon be floating through that hole in the ceiling.”
	“Then be done with yer work!” Catti-brie shouted at him. “And
be leaving me to me own!”
	Entreri bit back his next retort, gnawed on his lips instead, and
determined that if he was alive when this was all over, Catti-brie
would wish that she was not.
	The drow facing the assassin came on suddenly, thinking that his
opponent was distracted and thinking to score a quick victory But
Entreri’s sword snapped left, right, and straight ahead, batting aside
both weapons and scoring a minor hit, again on the bleeding arm.



	They were no more than a tumbling ball of fur and scales, Guen 
hwyvar and the subterranean lizard locked in a raking, biting
jumble. With its longer neck, the lizard had its head far to the side, 
biting at Guenhwyvar’s flank, but Guenhwyvar stubbornly kept a
firm hold on the base of the lizard’s neck. More deadly still, the pan 
ther ‘s claws were inside the lizard’s reach, affording Guenhwyvar a
distinct advantage as they rolled. The panther’s front claws kept a
tight and steady hold, while Guenhwyvar ‘s rear legs tucked in close
and began a vicious kicking rake, tearing at the reptilian beast.
	Victory was at hand for the beleaguered panther, but then
Guenhwyvar felt a wicked sting in the back, the sting of a sword.
	The panther whipped its maw about in a frenzy, tearing out a
chunk of the lizard’s shoulder, but the pain brought blackness, and
Guenhwyvar, already battered from the run along the walkways, 
had to give in, had to melt away into an insubstantial mist and
follow the tunnel back to the Astral Plane.
	The torn lizard rolled about on the stone, bleeding from its neck
and sides, its belly hanging free of its skin. It crept away as swiftly
as it could, seeking a hole in which to crawl.
	Berg’inyon paid it no heed. He simply sat back on his own
mount and watched the impending battle with more than a passing
interest. He started to load his hand crossbow, but changed his
mind and just sat back.
	It occurred to Berg’inyon then that he stood only to gain, no
matter who won this contest.
	Hands out, his sword blades resting across his shoulders, the
weapon master casually walked up to stand before Drizzt. He
started to say something, so Drizzt thought, when a sword abruptly
whipped out. Drizzt heaved his own weapon up to block, heard the
ring of steel on steel, then Dantrag sliced out with his second blade, 
and punched ahead with the hilt of his first.
	Drizzt could hardly register the moves. He got Twinkle up in
time to block the second blade, and got punched solidly in the face.
Then he was struck in the face a second time as Dantrag’s other
hand flew up, too quick for Drizzt to catch.
	What magic did this drow possess? Drizzt wondered, for he did
not believe that anyone could move so quickly
	The razorlike edge of one of Dantrag’s swords began to glow a
distinct line of red, though it seemed no more than a dull blur to
Drizzt as the weapon master continued his lightning fast routines.
Drizzt could only react to each move, snap his blades this way and
that and take some relief in hearing the ring of steel. All thoughts of
countering the moves were gone; Drizzt could hope only that
Dantrag would quickly tire.
	But Dantrag smiled, realizing that Drizzt, like any other drow, 
could not move fast enough to effectively counter.
	Twinkle caught a slice coming in at Drizzt’s left; Dantrag’s other
sword, the glowing one, arced out wide to the right, and Drizzt was
somewhat off balance as his second scimitar rushed, tip straight up, 
to block. The sword connected on the scimitar near its tip, and Drizzt
knew that he hadn’t the strength to fully stop that blow with that dif 
ficult angle. He dove straight down as his blade inevitably tipped in, 
and the sword swished above his head, went right across as Drizzt
spun away, to slash against, and cut deeply into!, the stone wall.
	Drizzt nearly screamed aloud at the incredible edge that
weapon displayed, to cut stone as easily as if it had been a wall of
Bruenor Battlehammer’s favorite smelly cheese!
	“How long can you continue?” Dantrag asked him, mocked
him. “Already your moves are slowing, Drizzt Do’Urden. I will
have your head soon.” In stalked the confident weapon master, 
even more confident now that he had seen the legendary renegade
in battle.
	Drizzt had been caught by surprise, back on his heels and fear 
ful of the consequences of his loss. He forced himself to realize that
now, forced himself to fall into a meditative trance, purely focused
on his enemy He could not continue to react to Dantrag’s flashing
movements; he had to look deeper, to understand the methods of
his cunning and skilled adversary as he had when Dantrag had first
charged on the lizard. Drizzt had known the charging Dantrag
would go to the ceiling, because he had managed to understand the
situation through the weapon master’s eyes.
	And so it went now. Dantrag came with a left, right, left, left, 
thrust combination, but Drizzt’s blades were in line for the parry
every time, Drizzt actually beginning the blocks before Dantrag had
begun the attacks. The weapon master’s attacks were not so differ 
ent from Zak’nafein’s during all those years of training. While
Dantrag moved faster than any drow Drizzt had ever encountered, 
the ranger began to suspect that Dantrag could not improvise in the
middle of any moves.
	He caught a high riding sword, spun a complete circuit to whip
Twinkle across and knock away the predictable thrust of the second.
It was true, Drizzt then knew; Dantrag was as much a prisoner of
his own speed as were his opponents.
	In came a vicious thrust, but Drizzt was already down on his
knees, one scimitar snapping up above his head to keep Dantrag’s
weapon riding high. The weapon master’s second strike was on the
way, but it fell a split second after Twinkle had reached out and cut a
fine line on the side of Dantrag’s shin, forcing the Baenre into a hop 
ping retreat instead.
	With a growl of rage, the weapon master bore right back in, 
slapping at Drizzt’s blades, slowly working them up high. Drizzt
countered every move, falling in line with the attack patterns. At
first, the ranger’s mind worked ahead to find an effective counter 
strike, but then Drizzt understood Dantrag’s aim in this routine, a
scenario that Drizzt had played out before with his father.
	Dantrag could not know, only Drizzt and Zak’nafein knew, 
that Drizzt had found the solution to this usually unbeatable
offense.
	Up higher went the scimitars, Dantrag moving under them and
in. The attack was called double thrust low, wherein the aim was to
get your opponent’s weapons up high, then step back suddenly and
come straight in with both your own blades.
	Drizzt hopped back and snapped his crossed scimitars down
atop the flying blades, the only parry against the cunning move, the
cross down. But Drizzt was countering even as he blocked, shifting
his weight to his lead foot as his back foot kicked out, between his
scimitar hilts, between Dantrag’s surprised eyes.
	He connected squarely on the weapon master’s face, staggering
Dantrag back several steps. Drizzt sprang right ahead, all over the
stunned drow in a wild flurry Now he was forcing the moves, strik 
ing repeatedly so that his opponent could not again gain the off en 
sive, could not use that unbelievable speed to its fullest advantage.
	Now it was Dantrag who was reacting to Drizzt’s blinding
attacks, scimitars snapping in at him from every conceivable angle.
Drizzt didn’t know how long he could keep up the wild flurry, but
he understood that he could not allow Dantrag to regain the offen 
sive, could not allow Dantrag to again put him back on his heels.
	To Dantrag’s credit, he managed to keep his balance well
enough to defeat the attacks, and the weapon master dodged aside
whenever a scimitar slipped through. Drizzt noticed that only
Dantrag’s hands seemed possessed of that impossible speed; the
rest of the drow’s body moved well, perfectly balanced, as would be
expected of a Baenre weapon master. But, ultimately, except for the
hands, Dantrag moved no faster than Drizzt could move.
	Twinkle went straight in. Dantrag’s sword banged against its
side. Sly Drizzt twisted the scimitar, used its curving blade to roll it
over the weapon master’s sword and bite at his arm.
	Dantrag leaped back, trying to break the clinch, but Drizzt
paced him, scimitars waving. Again, then a third time, Drizzt
turned Dantrag’s perfect parries into minor hits, the fluid motions
of his curving blades trapping the straight blocks of the swords.
	Could Dantrag anticipate Drizzt’s moves as well as Drizzt had
anticipated the weapon master’s? Drizzt wondered with more than
a little sarcasm, and he sublimated his wicked smile. Straight ahead
went Twinkle, and out snapped the blocking sword, the only pos 
sible defense. Drizzt started to twist the blade, and Dantrag started
to retract the arm.
	But Drizzt stopped suddenly and reversed the flow, Twinkle
shooting across faster than Dantrag could react. The deadly scimitar
gashed deeply into the weapon master’s other forearm, poking it
out wide, then came back across, Drizzt stepping into the move so
that his extended blade slashed a tight line across Dantrag’s belly
	Wincing in pain, the weapon master managed to leap back from
his deadly adversary “You are good, ” he admitted, and though he
tried to keep his confident facade, Drizzt could tell by the quiver in
his voice that the last hit had been serious.
	Dantrag smiled unexpectedly “Berg’inyon!” he called, looking
to the side. His eyes widened indeed when he saw that his brother
was no longer there.
	“He wishes to be the weapon master, ” Drizzt reasoned calmly
	Dantrag roared in outrage and leaped ahead, his attacks coming
in rapid fire, suddenly stealing the offensive.



	Up flashed the sword and in stepped the furious assassin, his
jeweled dagger drinking eagerly of his opponent’s lifeblood. Entreri
jerked the weapon once, then again, then stepped back and let the
dead drow fall to the stone.
	The assassin kept the presence of mind to immediately jump to
the side of the passage, and shook his head helplessly as several
darts knocked against the corridor wall opposite the opening.
	Entreri turned to the still kneeling Catti-brie and demanded
again to know what she was up to.
	The auburn haired woman, so deceptively innocent looking, 
smiled widely and held up the last of the loaded hourglasses, then
put it into one of her arrow blasted holes.
	The blood drained from the assassin’s face as he realized how
Catti-brie had blown up the walkway back in the cavern, as he real 
ized what she was doing now.
	“We should be running, ” Catti-brie remarked, coming up from
her crouch, Taulmaril in hand.
	Entreri was already moving, not even looking down the side
corridor as he passed it.
	Catti-brie came right behind, actually laughing. She paused
long enough at the hole in the floor, leading back into the main cav 
ern, to shout out to those levitating dark elves drifting up toward
her that they weren’t likely to enjoy the reception.



	Thrust left, thrust right, down cut left, down cut right. Dantrag’s
attack came brutally swift and hard, but Drizzt’s scimitars were in
place for the parries and blocks, and again the cunning ranger used
a third weapon, his boot, to counter. He snapped his foot up to
slam the weapon master’s already wounded belly
	Dantrag couldn’t stop from lurching over, and then he was back
on the defensive again, reacting desperately as Drizzt relentlessly
waded in.
	Around the bend came Entreri. “Run on!” he cried, and though
the assassin needed Drizzt for his ultimate escape, he did not dare to
stop and pull the ranger along.
	Catti-brie came next, just in time to see Drizzt’s scimitars flash
straight ahead, to be taken out wide and held by Dantrag’s blocking
swords. Up came Drizzt’s knee, quicker than Dantrag’s, as the two
inevitably moved together, and in a sudden explosion of agony, the
wounded weapon master understood that he could not hold Drizzt
back.
	Drizzt turned Twinkle over the blocking sword and put it in line
for Dantrag’s ribs, then the two seemed to pause for an instant, eye
to eye.
	“Zak’nafein would have defeated you, ” the ranger promised
grimly, and he plunged Twinkle deep into Dantrag’s heart.
	Drizzt turned to Catti-brie, trying to fathom the level of terror
apparent in her wide eyes.
	Then she was coming at him, weirdly, and it took the ranger a
moment to even realize that she was off her feet, propelled by the
shock wave of an explosion.

Chapter 27
SORTING IT OUT

	It creaked and groaned in protest, shock waves and sear 
I ing flames melting its hold on the cavern ceiling. Then it
fell, like a great spear, whistling along its thousand foot
descent.
	Helpless and horrified, those dark elves levitating nearby
watched it fly past.
Inside the domed chapel, the ceremony continued undisturbed.
	A female soldier, an elite guard of House Baenre but certainly
no noble, rushed up to the central dais, screaming wildly At first, 
Matron Baenre and the others thought her caught up in the out 
rageous frenzy, an all too common sight in the out of control drow
rituals. Gradually they came to understand that this soldier was
screaming cries of warning.
	Seven matron mothers turned suddenly suspicious gazes on
Matron Baenre, and even her own daughters did not know what she
was about.
	Then the stalactite hit.



	Drizzt caught Catti-brie in midair, then he, too, was flying. He
rolled over as the two touched down, burying the young woman
under him protectively
	They were both screaming, but neither heard anything beyond
the thunderous roar of the widening fireball. Drizzt’s back warmed, 
and his cloak ignited in several places as the very edge of the
firestorm rolled over him.
	Then it was done as quickly as it had begun. Drizzt rolled off
Catti-brie, scrambled to get out of his burning cloak, and rushed to
get to his still down companion, fearing that she had been knocked
unconscious, or worse, in the explosion.
	Catti-brie opened a blue eye and flashed a wistful, mischievous
smile.
	“I’m betting that the way is clear behind us, ” she smirked and
Drizzt nearly laughed aloud. He scooped her up in his arms and
hugged her tightly, feeling in that instant as though they might actu 
ally be free once more. He thought of the times to come in Mithril
Hall, times that would be spent beside Bruenor and Regis and
Guenhwyvar, and, of course, Catti-brie.
	Drizzt could not believe all that he had almost thrown away
	He let Catti-brie go for a moment and rushed back around the
bend, just to confirm that all those drow pursuing them were gone.
	“Hello, ” Catti-brie whispered under her breath, looking down
to a magnificent sword lying next to the fallen weapon master.
Catti-brie gingerly picked the weapon up, confused as to why an
evil drow noble would wield a sword whose hilt was sculpted in the
shape of a unicorn, the symbol of the goodly goddess Mielikki.
	“What have you found?” Drizzt asked, returning calmly
	“I think that this one’d suit yerself, ” Catti-brie remarked, hold 
ing up the weapon to display the unusual pommel.
	Drizzt stared at the sword curiously He had not noticed that
hilt in his fight with Dantrag, though he certainly remembered that
blade as the one that had so easily cut through the stone wall. “You
keep it, ” he offered with a shrug. “I favor the scimitar, and if that is
truly a weapon of Mielikki, then she would be pleased to have it on
the hip of Catti-brie.”
	Catti-brie saluted Drizzt, smiled widely, and slipped the sword
into her belt. She turned about, hearing Entreri’s return, as Drizzt
bent over Dantrag’s body and quietly slipped the bracers off the
dead drow’s wrists.
	“We cannot delay!” the obviously flustered assassin snapped.
“All of Menzoberranzan knows of us now, and a thousand miles
will not be enough ground between me and that wretched city”
	For perhaps the first time, Drizzt found that he completely
agreed with the assassin.
	Belted as it was on the hip of the human woman was not exactly
what the sentient Khazid’hea had in mind. The sword had heard
much talk of Drizzt Do’Urden and, upon Dantrag’s defeat, had
altered the appearance of its magical pommel so that it might rest in
the grasp of the legendary warrior.
	Drizzt hadn’t taken the bait, but the sword that had rightfully
earned the name Cutter could wait.



	The going was smooth, with no pursuit evident for the rest of
that day and long into the night. Finally the group had no choice but
to stop and rest, but it was a fitful and nervous time indeed.
	So it went for three days of running, putting the miles behind
them. Drizzt kept the lead, and kept the companions far from Bling 
denstone, fearful of involving the svirfnebli in any of this incredible
and dangerous web. He could not understand why lizard riding
drow patrols had not overtaken them, could hardly believe that
scores of dark elves were not crouched in corridors behind them, or
on their flanks, waiting to spring an ambush.
	Thus, Drizzt was not surprised to see a familiar, outrageous
dark elf standing in the middle of the corridor, wide brimmed hat in
hand, waiting to greet him and his fleeing companions.
	Catti-brie, still seething, still on her warrior’s edge, brought
Taulmaril up immediately “Ye’re not for running free this time, ” she
muttered under her breath, remembering how the crafty Jarlaxle
had eluded them after the fight in Mithril Hall.
	Entreri grabbed the arrow before Catti-brie had bent the bow, 
and the young woman, seeing that Drizzt was making no move to
go for his weapons, did not continue.
	“Please, dear and beautiful woman, ” the mercenary said to her.
“I have only come out to say farewell.”
	His words grated on Catti-brie’s nerves, but at the same time, 
she could not deny that Jarlaxle had treated her with dignity, had
not abused her when she had been his helpless prisoner.
	“From my perspective, that would seem a strange thing, ” Drizzt
remarked, taking care to keep his voice calm. He felt in the pouch for
the onyx figurine, but took little comfort in its presence, knowing that
if he found the need to summon Guenhwyvar, they would all likely
die. Both Drizzt and Entreri, understanding the methods of Bregan
D’aerthe and the precautions of its elusive leader, knew that they
were surrounded by skilled warriors in overwhelming numbers.
	“Perhaps I was not so opposed to your escape, Drizzt Do’Urden, 
as you seem to think, ” Jarlaxle replied, and there was no doubt in
anyone’s mind that he had aimed that remark directly at Artemis
Entreri.
	Entreri did not seem surprised by the claim. Everything had
fallen neatly into place for the assassin, Catti-brie’s circlet and the
locket that helped to locate Drizzt; the spider mask; Jarlaxle’s refer 
ences to the yulnerability of House Baenre during the high ritual;
even the panther figurine, waiting for him to take it, on Jarlaxle’s
desk. He did not know how purposeful and involved Jarlaxle had
been in arranging things, but he certainly understood that the mer 
cenary had anticipated what might come to pass.
	“You betrayed your own people, ” the assassin said.
	“My own people?” Jarlaxle balked. “Define that term, people.”
Jarlaxle paused a few moments, then laughed, hearing no answer to
his request. “I did not cooperate with the plans of one matron
mother, ” he corrected.
“The first matron mother, ” Entreri put in.
	“For now, ” the mercenary added with a wistful smile. “Not all
the drow of Menzoberranzan were so pleased by the alliance Baenre
had formed, not even all of Matron Baenre’s own family”
	“Triel, ” Entreri said, more to Drizzt than to the mercenary
	“Among others, ” said Jarlaxle.
	“What’re the two talking about?” Catti-brie whispered to
Drizzt, who only shrugged, not understanding the larger picture.
	“We are discussing the fate of Mithril Hall, ” Jarlaxle explained
to her. “I commend your aim, dear and beautiful lady” He swept
into a graceful bow that, for some reason, made Catti-brie more than
a little uncomfortable.
	Jarlaxle looked to Drizzt. “I would pay dearly for a glimpse of
the expressions worn by those matron mothers inside the Baenre
chapel when your lovely companion’s stalactite spear plunged
through the roof!”
	Both Drizzt and Entreri turned to stare at Catti-brie, who just
shrugged and smiled innocently
	“You didn’t kill many drow, ” Jarlaxle quickly added. “Only a
handful in the chapel, and no more than two dozen throughout
your entire escape. House Baenre will recover, though it may take a
while to figure out how to extract your handiwork from their no 
longer perfectly domed ceiling! House Baenre will recover.”
	“But the alliance, ” Drizzt remarked, beginning to understand
why no drow other than Bregan D’aerthe had come into the tunnels
in pursuit.
	“Yes, the alliance, ” Jarlaxle replied, offering no explanation. “In
truth, the alliance to go after Mithril Hall was dead the minute that
Drizzt Do’Urden was taken captive.
	“But the questions!” Jarlaxle continued. “So many to be answered.
That is why I have come out, of course.”
	The three companions looked to each other, not understanding
what the mercenary might be hinting at.
	“You have something that I must return, ” Jarlaxle explained, 
looking directly at Entreri. He held out his empty hand. “You will
turn it over.”
	“And if we don’t?” Catti-brie demanded fiercely
	Jarlaxle laughed.
	The assassin immediately produced the spider mask. Of course
Jarlaxle would need to put it back in Sorcere, else he would be
implicated in the escape.
	Jarlaxle’s eyes gleamed when he saw the item, the one piece left
to put into his completed puzzle. He suspected that Triel Baenre had
watched Entreri and Catti-brie’s every step when they had gone
into Sorcere to pilfer the thing. Jarlaxle’s actions in guiding the
assassin to the mask, though, in precipitating the escape of Drizzt
Do’Urden, were perfectly in line with the eldest Baenre daughter’s
desires. He took faith that she would not betray him to her mother.
	If he could just get that mask back into Sorcere, no difficult
feat, before Gromph Baenre realized that it was missing.
	Entreri looked to Drizzt, who had no answers, then tossed the
mask to Jarlaxle. Almost as an afterthought, the mercenary reached
up and took a ruby pendant off his neck.
	“It is not so effective against drow nobles, ” he explained dryly, 
and threw it unexpectedly to Drizzt.
	Drizzt’s hand snapped out, too soon, and the pendant, Regis’s
pendant, slapped against the ranger’s forearm. Quick as could be, 
Drizzt snapped his hand back in, catching the thing before it had
fallen half an inch.
	“Dantrag’s bracers, ” Jarlaxle said with a laugh as he noticed the
ranger’s covered wrist. “I had suspected as much of them. Fear not, 
for you will get used to them, Drizzt Do’Urden, and then how much
more formidable you will be!”
	Drizzt said nothing, but didn’t doubt the mercenary’s words.
	Entreri, not yet free of his rivalry with Drizzt, eyed the ranger
dangerously, not the least bit pleased.
	“And so you have defeated Matron Baenre’s plans, ” Jarlaxle
went on grandly, sweeping into another bow. “And you, assassin, 
have earned your freedom. But look ever over your shoulders, dar 
ing friends, for the memories of dark elves are long and the methods
of dark elves are devious.”
	There came an explosion, a blast of orange smoke, and when it
cleared, Jarlaxle was gone.
	“And good riddance to ye, ” Catti-brie muttered.
	“As I will say to you when we part company on the surface, ”
Entreri promised grimly
	“Only because Catti-brie gave you her word, ” Drizzt replied, 
his tone equally grave. He and Entreri locked uncompromising
stares, looks of pure hatred, and Catti-brie, standing between them, 
felt uncomfortable indeed.
	With the immediate threat of Menzoberranzan apparently
behind them, it seemed as though the old enemies had become ene 
mies again.


EPILOGUE


	The companions did not go back to the cave beyond
Dead Orc Pass. With Guenhwyvar’s guidance, they
came into the tunnels far beneath Mithril Hall, and
Entreri knew the way well enough from there to guide
them back to the tunnels connecting to the lower mines. The assas 
sin and the ranger parted company on the same ledge where they
had once battled, under the same starry sky they had seen the night
of their duel.
	Entreri walked off along the ledge, pausing a short distance
away to turn and regard his hated rival.
	“Long, too, is my own memory, ” he remarked, referring to Jar 
laxle’s parting words. “And are my methods less devious than those
of the drow?”
	Drizzt did not bother to respond.
	“Suren I’m cursing me own words, ” Catti-brie whispered to
Drizzt. “I’d be liking nothing better than to put an arrow through
that one’s back!”
	Drizzt hooked his arm over the young woman’s shoulder and
led her back into the tunnels. He would not disagree that Catti 
brie’s shot, if taken, would have made the world a better place, but
he was not afraid of Artemis Entreri anymore.
	Entreri had a lot on his mind, Drizzt knew. The assassin hadn’t
liked what he had seen in Menzoberranzan, such a clear mirror to
his own dark soul, and he would be long in recovering from his
emotional trials, long in turning his thoughts back to a drow ranger
so very far away
	Less than an hour later, the two friends came upon the site of
Wulfgar’s death. They paused and stood before it for a long while, 
silently, arm in arm.
	By the time they turned to leave, a score of armed and armored
dwarves had appeared, blocking every exit with engines of war.
	“Surrender or be squished!” came the cry, followed by howls of
surprise when the two intruders were recognized. In rushed the
dwarven soldiers, surrounding, mobbing the pair.
	“Take them to the watch commander!” came a call, and Drizzt
and Catti-brie were shuffled off at breakneck speed, along the wind 
ing ways and through the formal entrance to the tunnels of Mithril
Hall. A short distance from there, they found the aforementioned
commander, and the two friends were as startled to see him in that
position as Regis was to see them.
	“The commander?” was Catti-brie’s first words as she looked
again at her little friend. Regis bounded over and leaped into her
arms, at the same time throwing an arm about Drizzt’s neck.
	“You’re back!” he cried repeatedly, his cherubic features beam 
ing brightly
	“Commander?” Catti-brie asked again, no less incredulously
	Regis gave a little shrug. “Somebody had to do it, ” he explained.
	“And he’s been doing it fine by me own eyes, ” said one dwarf.
The other bearded folk in the room promptly agreed, putting a
blush on the halfling’s deceivingly dimpled face.
	Regis gave a little shrug, then kissed Catti-brie so hard that he
bruised her cheek.



	Bruenor sat as if turned to stone, and the other dwarves in his’
audience hall, after giving their hearty welcomes to Catti-brie, 
wisely departed.
	“I bringed him back, ” the young woman began matter of factly
when she and her father were alone, trying to sound as if nothing
spectacular had occurred. “And suren yer eyes should feast on the
sights of Menzoberranzan!”
	Bruenor winced; tears welled in his blue gray eye. “Damned
fool girl, ” he uttered loudly, stealing Catti-brie’s cavalier attitude.
She had known Bruenor since her earliest recollections, but she
wasn’t sure if the dwarf was about to hug her or throttle her.
	“Damned fool yerself, ” she responded with characteristic stub 
bornness.
	Bruenor leaped forward and lifted his hand. He had never
before hit his adopted daughter, but only managed to stop himself
at the last moment now.
	“Damned fool yerself!” Catti-brie said again, as if daring Brue 
nor to strike her. “Sitting here wallowing in something that ye can 
not change, when them things that are needing changing go merrily
along their way!”
	Bruenor turned away.
	“Do ye think I’m missing Wulfgar any less than yerself?” Catti 
brie went on, grabbing his shoulder (though she could not begin to
turn the solid dwarf). “Do ye think Drizzt’s missing him less?”
	“And he’s a fool, too!” Bruenor roared, spinning about to eye
her squarely. For just a fleeting instant, Catti-brie saw that old spark, 
that old fire, burning in the dwarf’s moist eye.
	“And he’d be the first to agree with ye, ” Catti-brie replied, and a
smile widened on her fair face. “And so are we all at times. But it’s a
friend’s duty to help when we’re being fools.”
	Bruenor gave in, offered the hug that his dear daughter
desperately needed. “And Drizzt could never be asking for a better
friend than Catti-brie, ” he admitted, burying his words in the young
woman’s neck, wet with an old dwarf’s tears.



	Outside Mithril Hall, Drizzt Do’Urden sat upon a stone, heed 
less of the stinging wind heralding the onslaught of winter, basking
in the dawn he thought he would never see.

