The Strike at Shayol Ghul 

by Robert Jordan 

Foreword by Robert Jordan 

Sometimes fans ask me whether I mean to write prequels to The Wheel of Time. While some requests are 
for books about The Trolloc Wars or the rise and fall of the High King, Artur Hawking, or the life 
histories of various characters, the most frequent are for books about the AOL and its end in the War of 
the Power, and the most often asked question is, I believe, "Why, when the greatest feats of the Age of 
Legends were done by men and women working together with the One Power, was the final attack on 
Shayol Ghul carried out by men alone?" At present I do not intend to write any of those books, but I 
won't say that a story or two might not creep out eventually. I do not normally do short fiction. My editor 
claims that for me, a short story means fifty thousand words. As for the question, though...I hope that 
those fans (and the rest of you) will be satisfied for the time with what follows, a fictional bit of 
"non-fiction," a piece from an Age called the Third Age by some, an Age yet to come, an Age long past... 

(A version of this will be included in An Illustrated Guide to The Wheel of Time, which will appear from 
Tor in 1997.) 

The Strike at Shayol Ghul 

(A Preliminary Introduction)


by Jorille Mondevin,
Royal Historian to the Court of
Her Most Illuminated Majesty, Ethenielle Kirukon Materasu,
By the Blessing of the Light,
Queen of Kandor,
Protector of the Land,
Shield of the North,
High Seat of House Materasu.


One of the most important finds of recent years, perhaps since the Breaking, is a partial copy of no less
than a history of the world from the drilling of the Bore into the Dark One's Prison to the End of the
Breaking of the world. The original apparently dated from early in the First Century A.B. Despite the
extreme paucity of material from the entire first millennium after the Breaking, we can only be thankful
that the art of printing survived the Breaking of the World when so much else did not, and was indeed
practiced to some extent during the Breaking itself, though under severe and restricted conditions.
Considering the widespread destruction of The Trolloc Wars and the War of the Hundred Years, which
although far less than the near totality of the Breaking still saw cities, nations, and far worse, knowledge,



go to the fires, we must marvel at any writing that has survived more than three thousand years. What we 
know is based on fragments, copied and recopied a thousand times, but at least we know something from 
them. Even a little knowledge is better than ignorance. 

Discovered in a dusty storage room in Chachin, the pages were in a chest full of old bills and receipts, 
students' copy books and private diaries, some so foxed by age and with ink so faded as to be unreadable 
where the pages themselves had not crumbled. The fragmentary manuscript was readable, barely, but 
presented the usual problems, quite aside from the difficulties of translation and dealing with centuries of 
copyists' errors; such a history would no doubt be a vast, multi-volume work (please see the author's 
Note ), yet of the two hundred and twelve surviving pages, the largest number of consecutive 


(Note comment Jorille Mondevin
12/6/2000 11:08:49 PM
All volumes of 'The Complete History of the War of the Shadow' and 'The Breaking of the World' will be available by subscription upon application to Mistress Jorille Mondevin at the Palace of Aesdaishan in Chachin.)
pages number six, and nowhere else more than two. Such dates as are given are totally incomprehensible, 
as no calendar dating from the Age of Legends has ever been found. Many references to cataclysmic 
events (dire battles and cities destroyed by balefire during the War of the Shadow, whole regions covered 
by the sea and mountain ranges raised overnight during the Breaking) and to such minutiae as the 
appearance of a certain person are but curiosities. The pages which might reveal exactly where these 
things happened, what their special significance was, the resolution or end result, are usually missing. 
Why then is this collection so important? First because, sundered as it is, it contains more information of 
the War of the Shadow than any other known single source, perhaps as much as all other sources 
combined in some ways. But even more importantly, it gives a great deal of information available 
nowhere else. And most importantly of all, the six consecutive pages and others which must be placed 
close to them contain the only known account of events surrounding what surely must be the most 
far-reaching single event in the history of the world, in any Age: the sealing of the Bore by Lews Therin 
Telamon and the Hundred Companions. 

We still cannot be certain how long passed between the creation of the Bore and the actual beginning of 
what would come to be called the War of the Shadow, yet plainly at least fifty years and possibly more 
than one hundred were marked by a rapid decline in the social order and an equally rapid increase in a 
thousand ills that previously had been either rare or entirely unknown. War itself was a "new" discovery, 
it seems, though one quickly learned, some might even say perfected. The War of the Shadow tilted one 
way, then another, in fire and blood, over its course. During the first three years, the Shadow made great 
gains, and large parts of the world fell beneath the horror of the Dark One's dominion, however indirectly 
through human representatives. And surely, the presence of Myrddraal and Trollocs cannot be called 
indirect. Under the leadership of Lews Therin Telamon, the legendary Dragon of the Prophecies, much of 
what had been lost was retaken over the next four years, though not without reverses. At that point, a 
stalemate developed, and for nearly a year neither side was able to effect any gain despite fierce fighting, 
but when the stalemate broke, the Shadow began to advance again, slowly at first but with ever 
increasing speed. According to the writer of that fragmentary history, "It was as if every step forward by 
the Shadow scattered the spores of chaos before it, and feeding on what grew, the Shadow gained 
strength, so that its next stride was longer, and the next step would be longer still." 

Huge areas had been devastated to varying degrees by this time as the war surged back and forth around 
the world, and it was obvious that while the Shadow was willing to starve or murder a great percentage 
of the population in the conquered territories, the forces of the Light could no longer sustain a protracted 
war. They were losing, being pushed toward inevitable defeat with increasing speed, and if they were to 
win at all, it must be done quickly. 

One of the plans for ending the war quickly, proposed by Lews Therin, centered around a direct attack on 


the Bore itself. Seven "focus points" (there seems no better translation from the old tongue, although they 
are obviously the Seals of Legend) were constructed of cuendillar. A raiding force -- so they called it, 
though even in the light of recent past events it must still seem a large army to most people of this day -a 
raiding force consisting of some twenty thousand soldiers to provide security and a circle of seven 
female Aes Sedai and six male (the minimum number believed necessary, and all the strongest who 
could be found) would Travel to Shayol Ghul , the one place on earth where what has been called "a 
thinness in the Pattern" makes the Bore detectable, and there to implant seals held by the focus points 
which would close up the Bore and shut the Dark One from the world once more. 

This plan was considered risky for a number of reasons. Even today it is known that the Dark One has a 
certain degree of effect on the world close around Shayol Ghul, and it was probable that any attempt to 
channel there would be instantly detected and the raiding party destroyed. Lews Therin himself, who 
intended to personally lead this huge raid, admitted that even with sucess, he expected few of the 
attackers to survive, perhaps none. Worse, several experts claimed that if the seals were not placed with 
exact precision, the resulting strain would, instead of sealing up the Bore, rip it open, freeing the Dark 
One completely. 

Another plan at the time centered around two huge sa'angreal, one attuned to saidin and one to saidar, 
both so powerful that using them required special ter'angreal, like miniature versions of the great 
sa'angreal, constructed especially for the purpose of accessing the sa'angreal. This project had its 
detractors, too, for the sa'angreal were planned to be so powerful that either one might well provide 
enough of the One Power to destroy the world, while both together certainly would. Some doubted that 
so much of the One Power could be handled safely under the circumstances. Against that was the 
certainty, according to the plan's supporters, that used together they would provide sufficient Power to 
drive the Shadow's forces back, to defeat them completely and erect a barrier around Shayol Ghul until a 
safe method of dealing with the Bore was assured. 

Detractors pointed out that the Bore had enlarged since it was first drilled, and behind the barricade 
erected by the sa'angreal it would continue to grow, so that eventually the Dark One might free himself 
within the barrier. The barrier might well contain the Dark One when all he could do was reach through 
the relatively small Bore, but could it hold back the Dark One let loose? 

The hall of the Servants quickly divided into two camps, and those who favored one plan derided the 
other. 

Support for the use of the great sa'angreal and opposition to attempting to implant the seals centered 
around a woman named Latra Posae Decume. Apparently a speaker of considerable force and persuasion, 
she gathered a large bloc around her, but what assured her victory was an agreement she reached with 
every female Aes Sedai of significant strength on the side of the Light. (In the manuscript, this agreement 
is called "the Fateful Concord," though it was doubtful that this was the name it was generally known.) 
Lews Therin's plan was too rash, too dangerous, and no woman who agreed to the Concord would take 
part in it. As precise placement of the seals was widely thought to require a circle, that apparently killed 
the plan, since men cannot create a circle, but can only be brought into one created by women. Work on 
the sa'angreal, in the form of two huge statues, was rushed forward. 


(Note comment Jorille Mondevin
12/6/2000 11:08:57 PM
Speculation of the wilder sort is rife among some who call themselves historians, and the discovery of this material has resulted in the expected from the usual quarters. Would the great sa'angreal have proven effective used as Patra Posae desired? Had the seals been placed by a circle comprised of men and women together, might the men, or even saidin itself, have been
protected in some fasion from the Dark One's counter stroke? Or would saidar have been tainted as well? The last possibility is enough to curdle the coldest blood, yet the fact is that events
transpired as they transpired, and such speculation is no more than a fireside game to frighten the gullible. Those I speak of will know who I mean.)
Just as the paired sa'angreal were completed, disaster struck. The access ter'angreal were being made at 
a place far removed from the sa'angreal (apparently because of a danger of "uncontrolled resonances 
during the final stages," whatever that means), and that region was overrun by forces under Sammael. 


The only good point in it was that the ter'angreal themselves had been hidden and the place where they 
were made destroyed (its very existence had been a secret at the highest levels all along) so that neither 
Sammael nor anyone else for the Shadow knew that any of these things were now within their grasp. The 
side of the Light still had the sa'angreal, but no safe way to access them; without the ter'angreal it was 
certain that even the strongest Aes Sedai would be burned out instantly by the huge flow of the One 
Power. 

Lews Therin argued again for his plan, acknowledging the risks but saying that was now the only chance, 
yet Posae maintained her opposition. Belief in the danger of misplacing the seals had spread, and many 
more female Aes Sedai had pledged to the "Fateful Concord," including a great number who were 
nowhere near strong enough to qualify for the raiding party circle. Tempers and passions rose, and an 
apparently unprecedented division along male-female lines began to develop among the Aes Sedai in 
general, if not within the Hall itself. Finally the Hall decided to continue with Latra Posae's plan, and her 
people began working to smuggle the access ter'angreal out of Shadow-controlled territory. 


(Note comment Jorille Mondevin
12/6/2000 11:09:03 PM
According to the manuscript pages, all of the agents responsible for this smuggling were caught, though that was not known until events had far outrun anyone's plans. They were brave men and women, for although those who were not killed outright were tortured, and though some revealed the purpose of their mission, none betrayed the location of any of the access ter'angreal. Still, the only real result was that the ter'angreal were widely scattered across areas held for the Shadow, their locations and even their existence to remain hidden for millennia.)
Almost immediately on the heels of Sammael's advance, armies commanded by Demandred and Bel'al 
struck heavily. At this point in the war, halting an advance by the Shadow was the best that could be 
hoped for; no conquered territory had been regained in the past two years. In intense and bloody fighting, 
these two drives were barely contained, but Demandred and Bel'al kept the pressure on. Sammael began 
a new offensive, also scarcely held, and there is mention of heavy military activity elsewhere. Apparently 
both of the great sa'angreal were threatened by these offensives; in fact, it was possible that they were 
the target. Massive riots swept a number of cities still held by the Light and the "re-emergence of the 
peace faction" is mentioned, apparently a group demanding negotiations with the Forsaken. The final 


(Note comment Jorille Mondevin
12/6/2000 11:09:17 PM
Before her death during the Breaking (which cannot be specified from the evidence of the manuscript, unfortunately either as to time or place), Latra Posae apparently rose to a prominence which rivaled that of Lews Therin before her. During the fighting aginst the Shadowsworn before the Breaking put an end to what by that time seemed inconsequential by comparison, she gained the name Shadar Nor, best translated as "Cutter of the Shadow" or perhaps "Slicer of the Shadow" (the difficulties of precise translation from the Old Tongue, with all its multiple meanings, will always remain with us). It is thus ironic that no other document yet discovered so much as mentions her name or acomplishments. Perhaps this will serve to restore Latra Posae Decume to her proper place in history.)
(Note comment Jorille Mondevin
12/6/2000 11:09:10 PM
The manuscript indicates that there were several peace factions during the course of the war. Or perhaps only one, with fortunes that waxed and waned. It is clear that several times during the war this group sent parties at its own initiative to the Forsaken seeking a negotiated settlement, and thatupon returning, members of each of these delegations were later discovered carrying out activitiesthat aided the Shadow's cause, though it seems that in some instances, they were completely unaware of what they had done. It is a wonder that those people did not remember a saying that is supposed to have originated during the War of the Shadow. "There is never peace with the Shadow.")
defeat was at hand; the will of the people to resist was fading, and should any one of the three major 
offensives commanded by Forsaken break through the end would be only a matter of time, perhaps as 
little as months. With Latra Posae's opposition continuing in the face of these events , and the female 

Aes Sedai holding to their pledge and thus making use of a circle impossible (the lines of division had 
hardened to a point where many female Aes Sedai refused to speak to male Aes Sedai, and the reverse as 
well), Lews Therin resolved to carry out his plan without the approval of, or even approaching, the Hall. 
Plainly it was going to be impossible to hold the huge sa'angreal long enough for the access ter'angreal 
to be smuggled out. In Lews Therin's view, there was no longer any choice. 

A group of powerful young male Aes Sedai, vocal in their arguements (apparently to the point of several 
times disrupting meetings of the Hall), had formed in support of Lews Therin during the struggle with 
Latra Posae, a group popularly called the Hundred Companions, though in actuality they numbered one 
hundred and thirteen at this point. As the highest military leader for the Light, Lews Therin was able to 
assemble a force of some ten thousand soldiers unbeknownst to the Hall. With that force and the 
Hundred Companions, he launched his planned attack at Shayol Ghul. 

Exactly what occured that day can never be known, only the results. Of the soldiers, not a single man or 
woman returned to give any account. The seals were placed safely, without ripping open the Dark One's 
prison as many opponents had feared. By chance, all thirteen of the Forsaken were at Shayol Ghul 
(perhaps summonded for a conference with the Dark One?), and they were trapped in the sealing, thus 
decapitating at one stroke the Shadow's leadership. Though most of the world was held for the Shadow, 
if that had been the whole result it is certain that over the next few years the Shadow would have been 
extinguished all across the face of the earth. Civilization had retained a large degree of cohesion in the 
areas held by the Light, far more so than in those held by the Shadow. Deprived of their highest levels 


(and also perhaps because of the loss of the Dark One's infuence) the Shadowsworn fell into struggles 
among themselves for power, dividing into warring, vulnerable well before the Breaking progressed to a 
point that made the war the least of anyone's concerns. In any case, the War of the Shadow must be said 
to have ended that day at Shayol Ghul. So it is generally recorded. 

But that was not the only result, of course. Instead, there was the counterstroke from the Dark One at the 
moment of sealing, and saidin itself was tainted. Lews Therin and the sixty-eight survivors of the 
Hundred Companions went insane on the instant. Within days they were leaving trails of death and 
destruction in their paths. By the time the taint on saidin was discovered, hundreds more male Aes Sedai 
had been driven mad, and what remained of civilization after the war itself had fallen into chaos. Even 
informing all the remaining sane male Aes Sedai of the danger was now impossible. That fateful day at 
Shayol Ghul ended the war, and began the Breaking of the World. 

The most suitable comment surely comes from what appears to be the introduction of the fragmentary 
manuscript. "Whoever read this, if any remain to read it, weep for us who have no more tears. Pray for us 
who are damned alive." 


Copyright 1996 by Robert Jordan. All rights reserved. 

Tor® and Forge® are trademarks of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC, and are registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office.



